Ficus species good sources of natural antioxidant drugs 

ABSTRACT
Objectives: Ficus species are a major crop, and are utilised worldwide. The objectives
of this study was to examine the antioxidant activity, total phenolic content and yield
of extract of different parts of twelve Ficus species and to compare these activities by
different extraction processes.
Materials and Methods: DPPH, ABTS free radical scavenging assay and total
phenolic contents (TPC) were performed to assess the antioxidant activity. The cluster
and correlation analysis were also performed.
Results: The highest percentages of inhibition were 94.58±0.88 % of DPPH and
99.66±0.55 % of ABTS inhibition. In addition, Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity
(mg TE/g dry parts) were 39.23±0.34 for DPPH and 29.18±0.16 for the ABTS assay.
The highest total phenolic contents were between the ranges of 22.29±0.69 and
27.03±0.53 mg GAE/g, respectively and extraction yields were 8.63±0.19 and
11.77±0.21 %, respectively, for maceration and ultrasonication extraction.
Conclusion: Most of the extracts from Ficus sp. obtained by UAE process showed
the highest activity and yields in comparison to the maceration process. In a
comparison amongst all the parts, fruits of ‘Ficus grossularioides Burm. f’ showed the
highest antioxidant activity, and fruits of ‘F. fistulosa Reinw. ex Blume’ exhibited the
highest phenolic content and yield of extract in both the extraction process. These
uncorrected proof
2
results show that Ficus species are by-products with strong radical scavengers and
can be considered as good sources of natural antioxidants for food applications,
amongst other purposes.
Keywords: Ficus species, Moraceae, Antioxidant activity, Phenolic compounds; Yield
percentages
INTRODUCTION
The genus Ficus belongs to the Moraceae family, containing about 800 species and
2000 varieties, constituting the largest genera of angiosperms in the world. These
species include woody trees, shrubs, vines, hemiepiphytes, climbers, and creepers,
which are present in most tropical and subtropical forests.1 Different parts of these
species have been used in folk medicine for a variety of purposes, due to their
antimicrobial, antidiabetic, anticarcinogenic, anti-inflammatory, anthelmintic, mild
laxative, hypotensive, antirheumatic, digestive and anti-dysentery drugs and
antioxidant activities.2,3 Furthermore, these species provide a rich source of chemicals,
such as alkaloid, coumarin, flavonoid, polyphenols, sterol, triterpenes, anthocyanin
and other metabolites.1,3 Among natural antioxidants, polyphenolic compounds are
one of the most abundant and are extensively distributed in the plants, acting as free
radical scavengers and antioxidants. Therefore, the discovery of polyphenolic
compounds from natural sources have received increased attention for their potential
role in the prevention of human diseases,4 where these antioxidants can be included
as part of the diet in the form of a food supplement or as a drug. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Chemicals and reagents
1,1-Diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl(DPPH),2,2'-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic
acid) (ABTS) and 6-hydroxy-2, 5, 7, 8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox)
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was purchased
from Merck, Germany. Potassium persulfate, 99.9 % pure ethanol, monohydrate gallic
acid and anhydrous sodium carbonate were purchased from Friendemann Schmidt
(FS) Chemicals, Australia. All the chemicals used were analytical grade. 18 mΩ
deionised water was used to prepare the standard materials and extraction.
Sample preparations
Different parts of twelve Ficus species were collected from the Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia (UKM) main campus from different locations, with the exception of F. carica
uncorrected proof
4
L , which was collected from the Fig garden, Living lab energy and Future crops
laboratories at Kuala Pilah under the Faculty of Engineering and Built Environment
(FKAB), UKM in May 2016. Every part of Ficus species was washed with deionized
water, given an airing at room temperature, and then dried at 35-40 º
C with the help of
Septree Food Dehydrator, China. All the parts of the Ficus species were powdered
using a special grinder (XY-2200B, Shenzhen Yason General Machinery Co., Ltd,
Guangdong, China) and stored in an airtight container. 