Pharmacology of Ficus: A review

ABSTRACT
Ficus is a medicinal plant that is commonly used in Malaysia, China, India, Thailand,
South Africa, and other countries due to its pharmacological properties such as
antimicrobial, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anagelsic, and
antihypertensive activities. Based on the ethnological reports, this genus has been
used to treat fever, skin diseases, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and
diarrhea. Women also have used the decoction of the whole plant as an herbal drink
to recover after childbirth. It also improves blood circulation and regains body
strength, as well as treats disorders related to the menstrual cycle. Recently, there
were a lot of researches about the isolation of the chemical constituents in the Ficus
genus to understand the functions and the mechanisms of these constituents that
attributed to the pharmacological properties of the plant. These chemical constituents,
such as flavonoids, triterpenoids, steroids, and furocoumarins, have shown diverse
applications in the pharmacotherapeutic field. Therefore, this comprehensive review
summarises the background and pharmacological properties of the Ficus genus.
INTRODUCTION
The genus Ficus of the Moraceae family includes a large number of species, which is
more than 800 species (Berg, 2003), mostly found in tropical areas of East Asia. The
leaves are usually simple and waxy, and most exude white or yellow latex when broken. Many species have aerial roots, and a number are epiphytic. The unusual fruit
structure, known as a syconium, is hollow, enclosing an inflorescence with tiny male
and female flowers lining the inside. The growth forms of Ficus are varied, including
shrubs, woody lianas, hemiepiphytes, epiphytes, and trees. Some indoor varieties of
Ficus, such as fiddle-leaf fig and Audrey fig can be grown as outdoor ornamental
plants as well (Al-Boudi and Afifi, 2011). Ficus species are rich in nutritional
components and used as a source of food in Egypt, India, south China, Turkey, and
Malaysia. Not all fruits from this genus can be eaten. For example, mistletoe fig or F.
deltoidea, a tropical shrub that has rounded leaves and readily bears small fruits,
unfortunately inedible. Only a handful with fruits considered edible such as Ficus
carica L. or common fig, which is the only Ficus species that is cultivated for its fruit
(Figure 1). This species is native to southwest Asia and the Mediterranean region.
Other species like F. erecta often cultivated as pot plants in Taiwan, Indonesia and
Japan (Aghel et al., 2009). ECOLOGY
Ficus trees are ecologically significant keystone species because they provide food
and shelter to many seed-dispersing animals in tropical forest ecosystems. A large
number of vertebrates feed on their fruits more than other plants. Shanahan et al.
(2001) stated that figs are the most widely eaten fruit because approximately >10% of 
3
the world’s birds and >6% of the world’s mammals consume figs. The fruits are an
important food resource to some frugivores, including fruit bats, capuchin monkeys,
gibbons, and orangutans. Other than that, bird species like hornbill, Asian barbets,
pigeons, and fig-parrot rely on fig fruits as their source of food. High levels of
carbohydrate and calcium in figs make them attractive to frugivorous birds and
mammals (Kinnaird and O’Brien, 2005). Fig wasp plays an important role in the
pollination system in tropical forest ecology. The fruit ripens quickly after the pollenbearing wasp leaves a Ficus plant, providing a rich feast that attracts a host of
mammals and birds. If the plants were to be cut out of a forest or the fig wasps were
removed, there would certainly be a dramatic change in the animal population, as
reported by the reduction of population densities of fruit-eating mammals on small
islands that lack Ficus species (Shanahan et al., 2001). The taxonomy of Ficus is
described in Table 1.
Phytochemical constituents
Ficus genus is reported to be responsible for the treatment of various disease
conditions because it contains a number of biologically active compounds, which are
also known as phytochemicals. These bioactive compounds are naturally expressed
by the plant in response to biotic and abiotic stresses (Chawla et al., 2012). The major
phytochemicals such as flavonoids and phenolic compounds are reported to be
concentrated in the leaves, fruit pulp, roots, stem bark or wood, peel and seeds of
different species of Ficus plant along with polyphenol, polysterols and triterpenoids
(Mandal et al., 1999). Fig fruit, especially the skin or exocarp and seeds, consist of
monosaccharide sugars and a mix of phytochemicals such as gallic acid, flavonoids,
rutin, chlorogenic acid and epicatechin. Various pigments like polyphenols,
flavonoids, and anthocyanins are responsible for the various colors shown in different
species of Ficus (Ahmed and Urooj, 2010).
Anticancer activity
Some species of the Ficus genus show the anticancer property in cell lines of several
cancer types. Hexane, dichloromethane and acetone extract of F. crocata have been
evaluated for antiproliferative activity in cell line of breast cancer. Dichloromethane
extract showed the strongest effect in reducing the proliferation of MDA-MB-231
cells (Sánchez-Valdeolívar et al., 2020). F. carica also showed anticancer activity
when the methanolic extract of leaf and fruit were evaluated against Huh7it liver
cancer cells using MTT assay (Purnamasari et al., 2019). The result showed that the
extracts had IC50 values >653 μg/mL for the leaf extract and >2000 μg/mL for the
fruit extract. A higher percentage of Huh7it apoptosis and necrosis in the leaf
compared with fruit extracts was also observed.
In another work by Bunawan et al. (2014), the anticancer activity of ethanolic
and aqueous extracts of F. deltoidea was tested against human ovarian carcinoma cell
line A2780 using MTT assay. The ethanolic and aqueous extracts gave IC50 values of
143.03±20.21 µg/ml and 224.39+6.24 µg/ml, respectively. Both extracts also showed
an apoptosis at 1000 μg/mL. It can be found that the ethanolic extract reduced cell
proliferation, while aqueous extract induced cell detachment. Various phytochemical
contents in the extracts could be attributed to this finding.
Antidiarrheal activity
Mandal and Kumar (2002) investigated the antidiarrheal activity in leaves
extract of F. hispida. Diarrhea in rats was induced with castor oil and PEG2. The
result showed that the methanol leaves extract could be used as an antidiarrheal
agent as it inhibited the activities of diarrhoea and enteropooling in rats. It was
assumed that tannins might be responsible for the antidiarrheal activity as it
denatures the protein and forms protein tannate, which minimizes the intestinal
mucosa permeability. Meanwhile, the leaf extract of F. microcarpa has been used
in investigating the effect of antidiarrheal activity in rats. Castor oil was used to
induce diarrhea in rats. The oral administration of the extract at doses of 300
and 600 mg/kg produced a significant antidiarrheal effect in rats. At 300 mg/kg,
the percentage of inhibition based on the number and weight of faeces was 79%
and 66%. While, at 600 mg/kg, the values for both number and weight were
32%. Based on the volume and weight of intestinal content, there was also a
reduction in anti-enteropooling activity (Bairagi et al., 2014).
Cardioprotective effect
Leaf extract of F. hispida was prepared to investigate the cardioprotective effect on
cyclophosphamide mediated myocardial injury due to oxidative stress in rat heart
(Shanmugarajan et al., 2008). This finding revealed that lipid peroxidation was
inhibited significantly. There was also an increased concentration of glutathione
reductase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and glutathione-Stransferase. Glutathione activity in heart tissue also decreased caused by
cyclophosphamide. Its cardioprotective activity could be due to antioxidant
constituents, which could be responsible for this finding such as hispidin, β-sitosterol,
β-amyrin, and bergaptin.
The extract of F. religiosa showed an improvement in oxidative stress, diabetic
markers, and inflammatory and cardiac markers in streptozotocin-induced diabetic
cardiomyopathy rats. The control of cytokine, diabetes and modulation of oxidative
marker could be attributed to the cardioprotective role of F. religiosa (Singh et al.,
2011). The extract of F. thonningii was prepared to investigate the myocardial
contractile performance on rat isolated atrial muscle strips. The result showed that
there were negative inotropic and chronotropic effects on both spontaneously beating
and electronically driven atrial muscle strips (Musabayane et al., 2007). According to 