Medicinal and nutritive value of Ficus auriculata - the wonder fig

COMMON INDIAN  NAMES:  Gular,  Timbal,  Timal,  Timla,  Tirmal,  Tremal, Trimmal 11 Habitat:  Ficus,  the  fig genus,  consists of  over 800  species and  is one  of  about 40  genera  of the  mulberry  family. The plants  are  mainly  distributed  in  temperate,  tropical  and subtropical  regions  of  about  1800-2600  m  altitude.  It  is native  to  Asia,  especially  in  India,  China,  Nepal,  Bhutan, Pakistan,  Myanmar,  Thailand,  Vietnam,  Malaysia  etc.  It  is present in most tropical and subtropical forests. Distribution over  India  ranges  from  sub  Himalayan  region  and  in  the deciduous forest of Deccan and South India12. Botanical  description:  F.auriculata  is  also  known  as Elephant earfig  tree because of its large leaves, young leaves start with intense red colour and then turn  into more  green colour  when it  reach  to their  large size.  The tree  is a  very large  evergreen,  4-10  m  tall,  with  huge  spreading  limbs supported by aerial roots which later form  accessory trunks extending  to a  large  area.  The  bark  is greyish  brown  with rough  texture.  Leaves  are  simple,  5-8  cm  long,  5-12.5  cm broad, oval, ovate or orbicular-ovate to oblong,  petioles 1.2-5 cm long, stipules are 1.5–2 cm. Fruits have fleshy pericarp and pear shaped with 8–12 conspicuous longitudinal ridges, 3–5  cm  in diameter  and  with  achenes  embedded  in  them, riped fruit is dark red in colour 11. TRADITIONAL  USES: Leaves of F.auriculata are crushed and the paste is applied to the wounds. They are also used in  diarrhoea and dysentery. It’s  stem  bark  juice  is  effective  for  cuts  and  wounds  and diarrhoea,.  Roasted  figs  are  taken  for  diarrhoea  and dysentery. Latex of roots is used in diarrhea, cholera mumps , and  vomiting. Mixture  of root powder  of  F. auriculata and bark  of  Oroxylum  indicum  is  taken  in  jaundice13.  Ethnic people in  kharagchari hill  district use  F. auriculata as   food and medicinal plant14. Fruits  of  Ficus auriculata  are  very  tasty.  Ficus  species  are rich  in  flavonoids,  polyphenolic  compounds,  which  have strong  antioxidant  properties  that  help  in  prevention  and treatment  of various  oxidative stress  related  diseases such
as and hepatic and neurodegenerative diseases. The  paste of leaves is applied on the wounds for curing15. Many Ficus species are usually used in regular treatments to remedy various diseases. They have been used as traditional remedy  as  stomachic  ,astringents,  vermicides  , antihelmintics  ,carminatives,    hypotensives  and antidysentery drugs. Many species  are grown for shade and ornament in gardens.  Various species produce edible figs of various  palatability.  All  species  possess  latex-like  material within  their  vasculatures  that  grant  protection  and  self restoration from bodily assaults16. PHYTOCHEMISTRY : Phytochemical  screening  of  F.auriculata  leaf  and  fruit  extract  were  evaluated  .  Which  showed  the  presence  of  phenols, flavonoids, glycosides, resins, tannins.  Alkaloids are absent17. F. auriculata leaf  extracts revealed  the presence of carbohydrates, phenols, tannins,  flavonoids, terpenoids, and alkaloids.  Glycosides  were present  in methanol  extract and absent in  chloroform extract, while saponins were absent in both  extracts of  leaf  18. Phenolic compounds  showing  wide bioactivity  including  antioxidant  properties.  Total phenolic content was found to be 21.404 mg GAE/mg dry weight  and total  flavonoid  content  was  found  to  be  50.83  ±  1.32  mg GAE/mg  dry  weight  in  leaves  of  Ficus  auriculata  19. F. auriculata  phytochemical  composition  and  biological potentials  were  evaluated.  The  total  phenolic  and polyphenolic  contents were  determined by  Follin Ciocalteu reagents method.  The total phenolic acid content was found to  be  5.75 mg/g  while  total polyphenolics  6.14  mg/g.  The presence of  quercetin, epigallocatechin  with concentrations 3.79 and  4.64 mg/100g20. Phytochemical  constituents were estimated  in  F.auriculata  or    F.roxburghii  such  as  total phenols, total flavonoid, anthocyanin, ascorbic acid and total carotenoid  The  total  phenol  content  was  estimated  to  be 4.13 mg GAE/g, total flavonoid was 3.10 mg QE/ g. Ascorbic acid,  anthocyanin  and  total  carotenoid  values  were estimated in a range of 3.36 mg/ 100g, 1.13 mg/ 100 g and 0.68  mg/100  g 21 . Phytochemical  analysis  of  stem  bark extracts of Ficus auriculata showed the presence of fatty oils, alkaloids, carbohydrates, saponins , glycosides, phytosterols, resins,  phenols,  tannins  ,  diterpenes,  flavonoids,  proteins
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES: Antioxidant activity: The antioxidant  activities  of F.auriculata fruits, leaves, bark were  determined  by  using  radical  scavenging  activities. Antioxidant activity of stem bark  (FASB) of F.auriculata was investigated  by  DPPH  free  radical  scavenging  method  in different  polarity  solvents  namely  hexane,  chloroform  and methanol. At 0.1 mg/ml scavenging  activity of 84.088% was found  in  methanol  extract,  83.864%  in  chloroform extract However  free radical  scavenging activity  of  hexane extract was  42% 12. The  DPPH  method  allows  estimation  of  hydrogen  radical donating ability  of the  extract and   result  was expressed  in EC50.  EC50 values were found to be 251.33 mg/ml for Ficus auriculata  and  486  mg/ml  for  standard  Ascorbic  acid respectively. Reducing  Power Assay  (RPA) was  found to  be 53.40 ± 0.01 mg/ml. Reducing capacity of the extract is some other important indicator of antioxidant activity19. F.  auriculata  methanol  and  chloroform  leaf  extract  evaluated  by  DPPH  radical  scavenging  assay  as  its antioxidant  activity,  The  percentage  of  radical  scavenging was  increased  with  increase  in  concentration  (20-100) µg/ml).  The  highest  antioxidant  potential  was  reported  in methanolic leaf extract of  F.auriculata and its  IC50 values lie in the range of  (40-60  µg/ml). The antioxidant potential  of the  extract  is  due  to  presence  of  flavonoids  and  phenolic content18. The  antioxidant  properties  of  F.auriculata  tips,  leaves, inflorescence (syconium), immature fruits and mature fruits were  examined  by  DPPH  and  ABTS  radical  scavenging assays, results  showed higher  antioxidant activity  in  leaves with  IC50  value  in  the  range  of  12.47±0.04  to  33.43±1.09 µg/ml  and  also  showed  ABTS  radical  scavenging  assay (100.36-383.29 mg TEAC g/extract 29. The  antioxidant activity  of ethanolic  extract  of F.auriculata leaves  and  fruits was  assayed  by  using  DPPH radical.  The result revealed that   concentration from 2-8 mg/ml for both leaves and  fruits. With  increasing the  concentrations of the extract antioxidant effect increased. The percentage of DPPH  of leaves and fruits from (40.78-85.49) and (44.90-88.24) in a  dose  dependant  manner  and  the  fruit  extract  has  more antioxidant activity than the leaves23. Antibacterial activity: Alcoholic  extracts of  leaves  and fruits  of  F.auriculata  were taken  at different  concentrations (50  μg/ml to  250 μg/ml) and  tested  against  human  pathogenic  bacterias  i.e. Staphylococcus  aureus,  Esherichia  coli,  Bacillus  aureus, Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.  Leaves  extract showed the  higher  inhibition zone  in Staphylococcus aureus at  concentration  50  μg/ml  to  250 μg/ml(10-21  mm), alcoholic extract of fruits showed the higher inhibition  zone in  Bacillus  subtilis   at  concentration  50  μg/ml  to  250 μg/ml(9-19  mm). The inhibition zones were less than those as  compared  to  standard  drug.  The  extracts  of  leaves  has more antibacterial activities than fruits extract[23.  Antibacterial activity of  F.auriculata was investigated by the agar  well  diffusion  method.  Hexane,  chloroform  and methanol  extracts  of  F.auriculata  stem  bark  was  tested against two bacterial strains E. coli and S. aureus. Methanolic extract has  the greater zone of inhibition  (4.5 ± 0.5 mm) for E. coli than that of hexane  and chloroform extract. In case of  S. aureus  greater  zone  of  inhibition   shown  by  the  hexane (7.1 ± 1.2 mm) than that of chloroform extract, whereas least antibacterial  activity  shown  by  methanolic  extract.  TheAntibacterial  potential  of  the  extracts    was  very  low  as compared to the standard antibiotics12
Anti-inflammatory activity : The  anti-inflammatory  activity    of  the  extracts  of  F. auriculata  was  evaluated  on  carrageenin-induced  rat  hind paw oedema model. The results revealed that increasing the concentrations of the extracts reduced the inflammation in a dose  dependant  manner.  The  alcoholic  leaf  extract  at (500mg/kg)  has  been  found  to  possess  significant  anti-inflammatory  activity.  anti-inflammatory  activity  may  be mainly due to the presence of triterpenoids as betulinic acid and  sterols,  lupeol,  stigmasterol  and  β-sitosterol-3-O-β-D-glucoside23. Toxicity activity:  Acute toxicity test  of the  methanolic leaf extract  of  Ficus auriculata   was investigated.  There  was  no behavioural  change  ,  no  mortality  and  toxicity  observed  after  the  administration  of    1000,  2000,  and 3000  mg/kg  concentration  dose  of  methanolic  leaf  extract    in  mice bodies.  LD50    was  found  at  3000  mg/kg  and  oral administration  of  the  methanol  leaf  extract    had  a  low toxicity[35].  So, the  Overall  conclusion stated  that  the LD50 value of the F.auriculata  aqueous extract is more than 2000 mg/kg body weight37
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  The phytochemical  constituents present  in leaves,  fruit and stem bark  of F.auriculata  showed the presence of alkaloids, carbohydrates,  glycosides,  tannins,  flavonoids,  and  sterols. And  these  phytoconstituents  may  be  attributed  to  the antimicrobial,  anti-inflammatory,  antidiabatic,  antioxidant, hepatoprotective etc. properties of a plant and could be used for the treatment of diseases caused by pathogens. Also the Ficus species  can be considered  as good  sources of  natural antioxidants  for  food  applications.  Anticancerous  activity was  found  insignificant,  but  in  the  future  at  higher concentration  it  could  be  used  as  an  anticancer  drug  in medical field. The antiproliferative activity against colon and liver  cell  lines,  and  it  also  induce  apoptosis  by  DNA fragmentation,  thus  demonstrating  their  potentials  as anticancer  chemotherapeutic  agents.  The  excellent properties of  F.auriculata which  were evident  by a  number of studies and literature  above  makes it a very helpful  drug due  to its  curative  properties,   easily available  at very  low cost.