Ficus Auriculata Everest - Complete Care Guide

Species: Ficus auriculata Everest

Subgenus: Sycomorus

Genus: Ficus 

Tribe: Ficeae

Plant Family: Moraceae

Origin:  Asia

Soil Drainage: Well-Drained

Soil pH: Lightly Acidic

INTRODUCTION
Ficus auriculata Everest is a lot less common than other Ficus varieties. It has huge velvety leaves with prominent pale veins. It can be quite demanding, but if you follow this care guide, I assure you, you will consider it low maintenance :) 

Ficus everest leaf.jpg
Here is a short video of my Ficus auriculata Everest before I cut it in half : ) 


POTTING MIX
I initially had my Ficus Everest potted in neutral potting mix, but it wasn’t happy. It wasn’t rapidly declining, but just seemed to be in constant border lining of dormancy. 

First I changed soil, and it immediately started to form new growth. 

Potting mix PH for Ficus auriculata needs to be between  6.0 and 6.5, more acidic soil will cause the plant to decline. Most of generic houseplant soil with pH range 6.0 -6.5 will work. It also has to be high in organic matter. Another important requirement for Ficus potting mix is drainage - it is often underestimated by beginner plant enthusiasts.  

My ideal Ficus potting mix recipe is:

3 parts Levington John Innes Seed compost

Leca (expanded clay pebbles) (for the bottom layer of the pot)

1 part Perlite

1 part Vermiculite

You can find out more about my potting mix recipe here: 

https://www.lyasolisblog.ie/home/flora/potting-soil-mix-recipe 

I also have recommended products list available here: 

https://www.lyasolisblog.ie/home/flora/about-recommended-products

I have recorded this video where you can see me potting my Ficus shriveriana step by step (in this video I forgot to add perlite and vermiculite to the mix, and my Ficus wasn’t overly ecstatic. A week later I repotted it again, adding those components). 


LIGHT
Ficus auriculata Everest needs very bright light and a lot of it. When I moved my Ficuses to the window, they all started thriving. They grow faster and foliage is much larger and super healthy. 

These pictures were taken on the 29th of September 2020. Scroll down to see it three months later!

View fullsizeIMG_4093.jpeg
View fullsizeIMG_4091.jpeg
View fullsizeIMG_4092.jpeg
WATERING
Generally Ficuses like moist soil. I let top half of soil of my Ficus auriculata dry before watering it. The potting mix I use retains humidity. Lecca at the bottom of the pot also keeps roots aerated and air humid, so there is no need to keep the whole pot constantly moist. 

TEMPERATURE
My Ficus auriculata Everest grows indoors, on my bedroom window. As I like to sleep with open window, the temperature at night goes down to 16C degrees, and is around 21C degrees during the day. I was initially worried that night temperatures might be low for the plant, but it’s very healthy and has grown a lot since I moved it to the window. This is the same plant that looked like a stub a couple of months ago!

Ficus auriculata Everest.jpeg
PROPAGATION
I have always found propagating Ficus very easy, rooting it in water, soil or moss, they seem to survive against all odds. Ficus Everest is an exception - I tried taking cuttings multiple times, but the bark just melted away and the cuttings always died.  

I finally decided to use air layering propagating technique - that’s why on the pictures above you see that the main stem has been cut. I have to say - it worked wonders! By air layering Ficus, I was able to root half the plant! Have a look at my step by step video below:


This is the top cutting of air layered Ficus auriculata Everest which you saw in the video above.

Ficus Everest.jpeg
Lya Solis
ficus, ficus everest, Ficus Auriculata Everest, houseplant potting mix, house plants care, house plant growth, house plant care tips, house plant fertilizer, indoor plants, air layering rooting
