Anticoagulant potential and total phenolic content of six species of the genus Ficus from Azad Kashmir, Pakistan

Abstract
Purpose: To investigate the total phenolic and flavonoid contents of Ficus benghalensis, Ficus elasticaa, Ficus palmata, Ficus religiosa, Ficus semicordata and Ficus auriculata, and to determine their anticoagulant potential.

Methods: Crude methanol extracts were prepared from the plant leaves, and fractionated using liquidliquid partition with n-hexane, chloroform and ethyl acetate. The total flavonoid and total phenolic contents of the extracts and their fractions were determined. The anticoagulant potential of the six Ficus species were evaluated in healthy human plasma, using activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin time (PT) methods.

Results: Phytochemical analysis showed the presence of considerable amounts of flavonoids ranging from 5.3 ± 0.7 to 11.8 ± 0.3 mg rutin equivalents (RE)/g, and phenolic compounds ranging from 8.0 ± 0.7 to 86.5 ± 1.5 mg gallic acid equivalents (GAE)/g in each fraction of the six species. Results from in vitro anticoagulant potential assays showed significant anticoagulant properties, with prothrombin time (PT) ranging from 17.7 ± 0.7 to 26.7 ± 2.2 s, and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) varying from 47.7 ± 3.3 to 72.3 ± 5.4 s.

Conclusion: The results indicate that F. semicordata and F. Religiosa have higher anticoagulant potential than the other Ficus species studied.
Submission of a manuscript to this journal is a representation that the manuscript has not been published previously and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.

All authors named in each manuscript would be required to sign a form (to be supplied by the Editor) so that they may retain their copyright in the article but to assign to us (the Publishers) and its licensees in perpetuity, in all forms, formats and media (whether known or created in the future) to (i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store the contribution, (ii) translate the contribution into other languages, create adaptations, reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts and/or abstracts of the contribution, (iii) create any other derivative works(s) based on the contribution, (iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights in the contribution, (v) the inclusion of electronic links from the contribution to third party material where-ever it may be located, and (vi) license any thrid party to do any or all of the above.