Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels Myrtaceae

Botany and Ecology
Syzygium cumini: Trees or shrubs, 6–20 m or more. Weakly compressed twigs;
smooth white bark. Leaves ovate, elliptical or oblong, the blades 8–17  3.5–7 cm,
1.5–3.3 times longer than broad, coriaceous, olive green or brownish yellow,
concolor when dry, the upper part shiny; medium vein flattened or concave to sulcate
in the bundle, convex on the underside; side ribs 40 per side; marginal ribs similar to
lateral ribs, straight, a c. 1 mm from the margins; small glands, frequently dotted,
numerous on both surfaces or more numerous on the underside; cuneate, obtuse or
rounded base, the tip obtusely sharp; petioles 15–30 mm, concave to adaxially
impressed. Inflorescences terminal, axillary or in the nodes without leaves, solitary,
cimosas or paniculate, 1–3 times compound; axis 15–60 mm, lateral branches 15–
20 mm; shaft and branches compressed, glandular; flowers 15–100, arranged ten-
derly at the tips of the branches; bracts 1–1.5 mm, deciduous long before anthesis,
triangular, apex acuminate; buttons 4–5 mm, claviform. Sessile flowers; bracts
similar to bracts, deciduous long before anthesis; Hypanthus 3–5 mm, 2–3 mm
diameter at the mouth of the tube, crateriform, the base abruptly contracted to form a
pseudopedicle c. 1 mm; calyx wolves c. 0.5  0.5 mm, deciduous on anthesis or
shortly after, scarious margins; petals fused, forming a calyptra that falls as a unit in
the anthesis, white; stamens 50–100, 3–5 mm, white; style 6–7 mm. Fruits 15–
20  7–10 mm, ellipsoidal; fleshy pericarp; calyx tube reduced to a persistent apical
ring 1–2 mm in diameter; black-purple color at maturity. Cultivated, occasionally
escaped (Wu et al. 2012, 1994–2013).
This evergreen tree has a total life span of 60 years (Reddy 2015), and it is fully
grown in nearly 40 years (Nair 2017). Total height attains of mature tree vary from
15 m to 40 m with the trunk girth of 0.5 m to 2.5 m diameter. Dense foliage covers
2 A. S. Ansari et al.
the whole throughout the year. Bark is rough, cracked, flaking, and discolored on the
lower portion of the stem, whereas on upper portion, it is light gray or grayish brown,
and smooth. Wood is hard, durable, and whitish. This evergreen species retains a full
foliage during summer (April to August). Sessional defoliation starts from December
to January, and the lowest amount of foliage is observed in the month of January to
February (Reddy 2015). However, trees never become completely leafless. In Sri
Lanka, the blooming begins from May to August, and the fruits ripen during
November to December (Morton 1987). Syzygium cumini is principally found in a
wide range of climatic zones of tropical and subtropical environment conditions all
around the globe. Distribution of Syzygium cumini is from a sea level to hills
(1200 m) and can grow in a variety of soils and geological formation such as
alluvial, lateritic, sandy alluvia, marl and oolitic limestones. It is native to Nepal,
Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Indonesia,
which is in the wild and cultivation (Nair 2017) (Figs. 1 and 2).
Phytochemistry
Stem bark: betulinic acid, friedelin, epi-friedelanol, β-sitosterol, eugenin, and fatty acid
ester of epi-friedelanol, β-sitosterol, quercetin, kaempferol, myricetin, gallic acid,
ellagic acid, bergenins, flavonoids, and tannins (Sengupta and Das 1965; Bhargava
et al. 1974; Bhatia and Bajaj 1975). Flowers: kaempferol, quercetin, myricetin,
isoquercetin (quercetin-3-glucoside), myricetin-3-L-arabinoside, quercetin-3-D-galac-
toside, dihydromyricetin, oleanolic acid, acetyl oleanolic acid, eugenol-triterpenoid A,
and eugenol-triterpenoid B (Nair and Subramanian 1974). Roots: Flavonoid glyco-
sides and isorhamnetin 3-O-rutinoside. Fruits: vitamin A, vitamin C, raffinose, glu-
cose, fructose, citric acid, malic acid, gallic acid, anthocyanins, delphinidin-3-
gentiobioside, malvidin-3-laminaribioside, petunidin-3, cyanidin diglucoside,
petunidin, and malvidin (Sharma and Seshadri 1955; Anonymous 2002; Teixeira
et al. 2006). Seed: gallic acid, glycoside jamboline, jambosine, triterpenoid B, penta-
cyclic triterpenoid (friedelin), tannins, ellagic acid, β-sitoterol, gallitanins, terpenes
(1-limonene, dipentene), corilagin, 3,6-hexahydroxydiphenoylglucose, 4,6-hexa-
hydroxydiphenoylglucose, 1-galloylglucose, 3-galloylglucose, quercetin, and ele-
ments such as zinc, chromium, vanadium, potassium, and sodium (Chopra et al.
1956; Gupta and Agrawal 1970; Bhatia and Bajaj 1975; Anonymous 2002). Sagrawat
et al. (2006) suggested that extract seed holds various pharmacological properties,
which include antibacterial, antifungal, hepatoprotective, and cardioprotective. Seeds
have been used to cure various diseases.
Local Medicinal Uses
Syzygium cumini: A decoction of dry leaves and seeds is hypoglycemic (Grover
et al. 2000, Prince et al. 1998). A plant extract is antibacterial (Shafi et al. 2002). An
ethanolic extract is anti-inflammatory (Muruganandan et al. 2001). Whole parts of
Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels 3
S. cumini are utilized for medicinal and edible purposes. This evergreen, fast-
growing tree is famous for various medicinal purposes, wood, firewood, pharma-
ceuticals, ornamental, and so on. In Ayurveda, the plant has astringent, carminative,
diarrheic, dysenteric, and stomachic properties (Dash and Gupta 1994; Dey 1998;
Joshi 2006). Juice is useful in jaundice and liver diseases (Menon 1993), diabetes,
hyperglycemia, blood purification, malaria, and bacterial infection (Chauhan 2019).
Bark: to treat women suffering from leucorrhea and urine bleeding (Kapur et al.
1968). Herb: For strengthening the teeth and gum and improves sexual weakness,
sore throat, and mouth ulcer (Chauhan 2019). Leaves: the leaves are used to help in
strengthening the teeth and gums (Baral and Kurmi 2006), strengthen the teeth and
gums, and treat various skin diseases (Nadkarni 1954). A seed powder and bark
decoction are used in diarrhea, dysentery, diabetes, and inflammatory activity
(Kunwar et al. 2009a, b) and to treat menstrual disorders, vaginal disorders, the
Fig. 1 Syzygium cumini
(Myrtaceae), plant, Bara,
Nepal. (Photo Abrar Ansari)
4 A. S. Ansari et al.
female productive system disorders, uterine bleeding, and piles (Kapur et al. 1968)
(Menon 1993) and reduce sugar in urine (Singh and Rao 1983). Juice of the leaves
and bark: to remedy dysentery, chronic diarrhea, and diabetes (Dastur 1962; Singh
and Rao 1983). Flowers and leaves with other ingredients: treat throat cancer (Kapur
et al. 1968). Flower powder to stop bleeding from wound (Raj et al. 2018; Variyar
2011). Used to treat diabetes (Pratap Singh et al. 2019; Ullah et al. 2019). Also for
diarrhea, diabetes, inflammations; to strengthen the teeth and gums; as astringent,
carminative, diuretic, anthelminthic, and stomatic (Kunwar et al. 2009a, b; Kunwar
and Bussmann 2009); also for headache (Jain et al. 2005); and oral ulcers and piles
(Gairola et al. 2014).
Syzygium cordatum: In traditional medicine, a root decoction is drunk against
amenorrhea. Ash of the burned wood is rubbed on the forehead against headache.
Decoctions of the root bark and stem bark are taken for the treatment of malaria.
Root and bark infusions are taken to treat cough, root, and bark decoctions to treat
indigestion, abdominal pain, stomachache, and venereal diseases (Kokwaro 2009).
The bark is used as an emetic and to treat diarrhea, stomach problems, headache,
amenorrhea, wounds, and respiratory problems. A leaf extract is drunk against
cough, and an infusion of the leaves against diarrhea and stomach complaints and
as a purgative. Ground leaves, bark, and roots steeped in water are applied as a
poultice as a galactagogue.
Fig. 2 Syzygium cumini
(Myrtaceae), fruits and
flowers, Nepal. (Photo Ripu
M Kunwar)
Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels 5
Syzygium guineense: With ample application in African traditional medicine but can
be dangerous, as the bark may be poisonous, and death after its use has been
recorded. The root is soaked in water for drinking and bathing to treat epilepsy. A
root infusion is drunk for the treatment of stomachache. Root extracts are taken as a
purgative, anthelmintic, and taeniacide, also for stomachache. Bark decoctions are
used against stomachache, diarrhea, and malaria; they are considered mildly laxative
and are applied in draught or in baths as a tonic. An infusion is taken against coughs,
asthma, throat problems, and intercostal pain. The powdered bark is used as an
antispasmodic, purgative, and anthelmintic and used for the treatment of diarrhea,
stomachache, broken bones, and wounds. The fruits are eaten for diarrhea (Kokwaro
2009). In Cameroon the bark is used for the treatment of snakebites. Twig bark
preparations are applied against paralysis. A decoction of twigs and leaves is drunk
or used as an enema for its purgative properties and against colic, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain. It is also used as drink or bath against insanity, amenorrhea, and
cerebral malaria. The crushed leaf is applied on wounds and boils. Leaf decoctions
are taken against intestinal parasites and stomachache, used as an enema against
diarrhea, and used as an embrocation to bathe and then massage into areas of sprain.
Leaf decoctions or pulverized leaves are given as tonic to pregnant women. The leaf
is chewed against stomachache. A liquid of chewed leaves mixed with water is used
as eye drops to treat ophthalmia. The fruit is used for treating dysentery. The bark
decoction is used for diarrhea (Bekalo et al. 2009). A leaf paste is applied to
swellings, and the powder is ingested for diarrhea (Flatie et al. 2009) (Figs. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and 8).
Syzygium aromaticum is part of a mixture used in Indian medicine for tuberculosis,
smallpox, measles, skin diseases, rheumatism, and cardiac problems and as antifun-
gal (Mohagheghzadeh and Faridi 2006).
Fig. 3 Syzygium guineense
(Myrtaceae), flowering
specimen, Bale Mountains
National Park, Demaro forest,
Ethiopia. (Photo
R.W. Bussmann)
6 A. S. Ansari et al.
