MEDICINAL USES OF JAMUN [Syzygium cumini (Linn) Skeeels.]: A REVIEW ARTICLE

BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION
Jamun (botanically known as Syzygium cumini (Linn)
Skeeels) is known for its seasonal perishable jamun
berry, which is also named as java Plum (in english) and
Jambul. It belongs to the Myrtles family Myrtaceae.
Jamun tree is evergreen plant grows up to 30 m in height
and has a girth of around 3.6 m. The jamun tree grows in
tropical and sub-tropical parts of the India and found in
Indian Subcontinent. Jamun tree is widely distributed
forest tree found in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia,
Bangladesh and Australia.
Jamun fruit is oval in shape. In immature stage, Jamun
fruit is green in color. It s color changes to crimson black
with ripening. The seed in the fruit bears about 25% of
its weight and fruit pulp an peel have 75 % of its total
weight. Ripe jamun fruits are odourless and juicy.
SYNONYMS & VERNACULAR NAMES
Latin : Syzygium cumini (Linn)
Skeeels
Botanical Synonym: Eugenia cumini & Eugenia
jambolana
English : Java Plum (Sometimes
Malabar Plum), Indian blackberry
Hindi Name: Jamun, Jambul
Other names: Jamblang, Jambolan, Duhat, Jambolan
Plum, Kavika, Mesegerak
Ayurvedic name: Jambu, Mahaphala
BOTANICAL CLASSIFICATION
Kingdom - plantae
Sub-Kingdom- Viridiplantae
Infra Kingdom - Streptophyta (Land Plants)
Super Division - Embryophyta
Division- Tracheophyta (Tracheophytes
or Vascular Plants)
Sub Division - Spermatophyta (Spermatophytes or
Seed Plants)
Class- Magnoliopsida
Super order - Rosanae
Order - Myrtales
Family - Myrtaceae
Genus- Syzygium
Species - Syzygium cumini
Jamun plant was first cultivated in Indian sub-continent
and it is grown in many other regions of south Asia such
as India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, Burma, Indonesia
and Sri-Lanka. In southern Asia, jamun tree is worshiped
by Buddhists and it commonly grown near Hindu
temples because sacred to Lord Krishna.
MEDICINAL PARTS
All parts of jamun tree are used in medicines.
Seeds (whole with seed coat and kernel)
wjpmr, 2019,5(8), 89-90 SJIF Impact Factor: 4.639
Review Article
ISSN 2455-3301
WJPMR
WORLD JOURNAL OF PHARMACEUTICAL
AND MEDICAL RESEARCH
www.wjpmr.com
*Corresponding Author: Dr. Vijay Bhushan Sharma
PG Scholar Deptt of Dravyaguna, Sriganganagar College of Ayurvedic Science & Hospital, Tantia University, Sriganganagar – 335001, India.
ABSTRACT
Jamun also called jambul, java plum in English and botanically accepted as Syzygium cumini (Linn) Skeeels . is
native to india and indigenous part of Indian fork remedies. In Ayurveda, its fruits, seeds, bark and leaves are used
as medicine for treating bleeding disorders and other diseases. Nowadays, its seeds famous as anti-diabetic
medicine. Jamun fruit has astringent flavor, sweet and slightly sour taste. The fruits are used to prepare jamun
Vinegar, which beneficial in abdominal diseases such as loss of appetite, abdominal pain, dysentery and irritable
bowel syndrome. Sometimes, it is also used for indigestion. Jamun seed powder is used in the management of
diarrhea, sysentery and diabetes. Jamun leages are prescribed for nausea, vomiting, bleeding disorders and
metrorrhagia.
KEY WORDS: Jamun, Indian fork remedy, anti-diabetic medicine.
Sharma et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research
www.wjpmr.com 90
Kernel
Fruit pulp
Leaves
Stem Bark
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
Jamun Plant is good source of following phytochemicals:
Anthocyanins
Glucoside
Ellagic acid
Jambosine
Glycoside jambolin or antimellin
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
In general, all parts of jamun tree have astringent, anti-
diarheal, anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory properties.
MEDICINAL PROPERTIES
Mild astringent
Digestive stimulant
Liver stimulant
Anti-inflammatory
CHARECTRISITIC CHARACTERS IN
AYURVEDA
Rasa – Kasaya, Madhur, Amla
Guna – Laghu, Ruksha
Virya – Sheeta
Vipaka – Katu
Prabhava – Cardiac Tonic
Dosha karma – Pacifies Kapha dosha & Pitta dosha but
increases vata dosha
Main action – Astringent & Digestive Stimulant
Side effect – ANAHA (Abdominal distension along with
intestinal gas and constipation)
Prevention – Kali Mirch (black pepper) and Kala namak
or Sendha namak should be added in juice to prevent its
side effect.
Interactions – Milk & Tea should not be taken before
and after eating jamun