Soluble dietary fibre fraction of Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek) seed improves glucose homeostasis in animal models of type 1 and type 2 diabetes by delaying carbohydrate digestion and absorption, and enhancing insulin action

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek) seeds have been documented as a traditional plant treatment for diabetes. In the present study, the antidiabetic properties of a soluble dietary fibre (SDF) fraction of T. foenum-graecum were evaluated. Administration of SDF fraction (0·5 g/kg body weight) to normal, type 1 or type 2 diabetic rats significantly improved oral glucose tolerance. Total remaining unabsorbed sucrose in the gastrointestinal tract of non-diabetic and type 2 diabetic rats, following oral sucrose loading (2·5 g/kg body weight) was significantly increased by T. foenum-graecum (0·5 g/kg body weight). The SDF fraction suppressed the elevation of blood glucose after oral sucrose ingestion in both non-diabetic and type 2 diabetic rats. Intestinal disaccharidase activity and glucose absorption were decreased and gastrointestinal motility increased by the SDF fraction. Daily oral administration of SDF to type 2 diabetic rats for 28 d decreased serum glucose, increased liver glycogen content and enhanced total antioxidant status. Serum insulin and insulin secretion were not affected by the SDF fraction. Glucose transport in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and insulin action were increased by T. foenum-graecum. The present findings indicate that the SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum seeds exerts antidiabetic effects mediated through inhibition of carbohydrate digestion and absorption, and enhancement of peripheral insulin action.
It is projected that the worldwide prevalence of diabetes is likely to increase to more than 300 million by the year 2025 (King et al. Reference King, Aubert and Herman1998). Diabetes not only afflicts prosperous nations, but often reaches its highest frequency in poor and disadvantaged communities that can least afford the heavy burden of treatment and long-term complications. Although sulphonylureas, biguanides, insulin sensitizers (thiazolidinediones) and other current drugs are valuable in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, their use is restricted by cost, limited pharmacokinetic properties, secondary failure rates and accompanying side-effects (Krentz & Bailey, Reference Krentz and Bailey2005). Moreover, these therapies only partially compensate for metabolic derangements seen in diabetes and do not correct the fundamental biochemical lesion (Taylor & Agius, Reference Taylor and Agius1988). Natural products have been a source of medicinal treatments for thousands of years, and plant-based systems continue to play an essential role in the primary health care of approximately 80 % of the world's underdeveloped and developing countries (King et al. Reference King, Aubert and Herman1998). Thus, it is prudent in the current context to look for new and efficacious approaches from the vast reserves of phytotherapy.
Trigonilla foenum-graecum (fenugreek) is native to the area from the Eastern Mediterranean to Central Asia and Ethiopia, and is much cultivated in India, Pakistan and China (Morton, Reference Morton1990). It has a long history of medical uses in Ayurvedic and Chinese medicine, and has been used for numerous indications, including labour induction, indigestion and as a general tonic to improve metabolism and health (Basch et al. Reference Basch, Ulbricht, Kuo, Szapary and Smith2003). In India, the seeds of fenugreek are commonly consumed by people suffering from diabetes. An antidiabetic effect of fenugreek seeds has been demonstrated in experimentally induced diabetes in dogs, rats and mice (Ribes et al. Reference Ribes, Sauvaire, Da Costa and Loubatieres-Mariani1986; Amin et al. Reference Amin, Abdul-Ghani and Suleiman1987; Swanston-Flatt et al. Reference Swanston-Flatt, Day, Flatt, Gould and Bailey1989; Grover et al. Reference Grover, Yadav and Vats2002). It has also been reported to exert antihyperglycaemic effects in human subjects with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (Riyad et al. Reference Riyad, Abfdul-Salam and Mohammad1988; Sharma et al. Reference Sharma, Raghuram and Rao1990; Madar & Shomer, Reference Madar and Shomer1998).
An active component of T. fenugreek seeds has been found to be associated with a defatted fraction, rich in fibre containing steroidal saponins and proteins (Valette et al. Reference Valette, Sauvaire, Beccou and Ribes1984). A novel amino acid derivative, 4-hydroxyisoleucine, also extracted from fenugreek seeds, has been shown to stimulate glucose-dependent insulin release from isolated rat and human islets (Sauvaire et al. Reference Sauvaire, Petit, Broca, Manteghetti, Baissac, Fernandez-Alvarez, Gross, Roye, Leconte, Gomis and Ribes1998). It has been reported also that fenugreek acts by delaying glucose absorption and enhancing its utilization (Raghuram et al. Reference Raghuram, Sharma, Sivakumar and Sahay1994). Effects of fenugreek on glucose uptake and utilization have been noted in peripheral tissues (Sharma, Reference Sharma1986) and an antioxidant effect has also been described (Ravikumar & Anuradha, Reference Ravikumar and Anuradha1999).
Trigonella foenum-graecum appears to exhibit a range of actions of potential benefit for the treatment of diabetes. In the present study, the antidiabetic effects of methanol extract-free residue of the fenugreek seed were evaluated. Possible mechanisms of action were elucidated using animal models of diabetes and in vitro cellular systems. This included assessment of carbohydrate digestion, absorption, gastrointestinal (GI) motility, and both the secretion and action of insulin.
Plant materials and preparation of extract
Seeds of T. foenum-graecum were collected from a local market in Bangladesh and botanically authenticated with voucher specimens that were deposited in the National Herbarium, Bangladesh. Seeds were ground to fine powder by a cyclotec grinding machine. The powder (300 g) was extracted with aqueous 80 % ethanol (3 × 400 ml, 30 min each time) by refluxing and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining residue was further extracted with chloroform (3 × 750 ml, 30 min each time) at room temperature. From the remaining residue (100 g), methanol extract-free residue of soluble dietary fibre (SDF) was prepared (25·2 g) according to published methods (Theander & Westerlund, Reference Theander and Westerlund1986).
Animals and induction of type 1 and 2 diabetes
Male Long-Evans male rats were bred at BIRDEM (Dhaka, Bangladesh) and maintained on a 12 h light–dark cycle at 21 ± 2°C. A standard pellet diet and water were supplied ad libitum. The overall nutrient composition of the diet was 36·2 % carbohydrate, 20·9 % protein, 4·4 % fat and 38·5 % fibre, with metabolisable energy content of 11·8 MJ/kg (2820 kcal/kg). Induction of type 1 diabetes was performed by a single intraperitoneal injection of overnight fasted rats (180–220 g) with 65 mg streptozotocin/kg body weight freshly dissolved in 0·5 m-citrate buffer (pH 4·5). The blood glucose level was checked 7 d after streptozotocin administration. Animals having blood glucose levels >20 mm were considered to have diabetes. Type 2 diabetes was induced by a single intraperitoneal injection of 48-h-old rats with 90 mg streptozotocin/kg body weight (Bonner-Weir et al. Reference Bonner-Weir, Trend, Honey and Weir1981). Experiments were carried out on these animals 3 months after injection. Prior to the experiments reported, the diabetic rat models did not receive any therapy to control diabetes.
Acute and chronic effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum
To evaluate the acute effects on basal blood glucose, the SDF fraction was administered by gavage (0·5 g/kg body weight) to 12 h fasted non-diabetic, type 1 and type 2 diabetic rats. The control group received an equal volume of deionized water (10 ml/kg). In another set of experiments, the SDF fraction was similarly administered together to the three groups of rats with glucose (2·5 g/kg body weight). Controls received glucose only. To evaluate long-term effects of fenugreek on glucose homeostasis, SDF fraction (0·5 g/kg body weight) was administered to type 2 diabetic rats by gavage twice daily for 28 d. Control rats received an equal dose of water. Blood samples were collected from the cut tail tip at the times indicated in Table 1 and the figures. Terminal samples were collected from the aorta under pentobarbital anaesthesia. Serum was separated by centrifugation and stored at − 20°C until further analysis. 
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on sucrose absorption from the gut
The effects of fenugreek on sucrose absorption from the gut were determined by measurement of unabsorbed sucrose content after an oral sucrose load. Non-diabetic and type 2 diabetic rats, fasted for 12 h, received a 50 % sucrose solution by gavage (2·5 g/kg body weight) with or without SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum (0·5 g/kg body weight). Blood samples were obtained from the tail vein before and 30, 60, 120 and 240 min after sucrose load for the determination of glucose. Some of the rats were killed at the same timings for determination of unabsorbed sucrose contents of the GI tract. The GI tract was excised and divided into six segments: the stomach, the upper 20 cm, middle and lower 20 cm of the small intestine, the caecum and the large intestine. Each segment was washed out with acidified ice-cold saline and centrifuged at 3000 rpm (1000 g) for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was boiled for 2 h to hydrolyse the sucrose following neutralization of the solution with NaOH. Blood glucose concentrations and the amount of glucose liberated from residual sucrose in the GI tract were measured. The GI sucrose content was calculated from the amount of liberated glucose (Goto et al. Reference Goto, Yamada, Ohyama, Matsuo, Odaka and Ikeda1995).
Acute and chronic effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum
To evaluate the acute effects on basal blood glucose, the SDF fraction was administered by gavage (0·5 g/kg body weight) to 12 h fasted non-diabetic, type 1 and type 2 diabetic rats. The control group received an equal volume of deionized water (10 ml/kg). In another set of experiments, the SDF fraction was similarly administered together to the three groups of rats with glucose (2·5 g/kg body weight). Controls received glucose only. To evaluate long-term effects of fenugreek on glucose homeostasis, SDF fraction (0·5 g/kg body weight) was administered to type 2 diabetic rats by gavage twice daily for 28 d. Control rats received an equal dose of water. Blood samples were collected from the cut tail tip at the times indicated in Table 1 and the figures. Terminal samples were collected from the aorta under pentobarbital anaesthesia. Serum was separated by centrifugation and stored at − 20°C until further analysis.
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on sucrose absorption from the gut
The effects of fenugreek on sucrose absorption from the gut were determined by measurement of unabsorbed sucrose content after an oral sucrose load. Non-diabetic and type 2 diabetic rats, fasted for 12 h, received a 50 % sucrose solution by gavage (2·5 g/kg body weight) with or without SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum (0·5 g/kg body weight). Blood samples were obtained from the tail vein before and 30, 60, 120 and 240 min after sucrose load for the determination of glucose. Some of the rats were killed at the same timings for determination of unabsorbed sucrose contents of the GI tract. The GI tract was excised and divided into six segments: the stomach, the upper 20 cm, middle and lower 20 cm of the small intestine, the caecum and the large intestine. Each segment was washed out with acidified ice-cold saline and centrifuged at 3000 rpm (1000 g) for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was boiled for 2 h to hydrolyse the sucrose following neutralization of the solution with NaOH. Blood glucose concentrations and the amount of glucose liberated from residual sucrose in the GI tract were measured. The GI sucrose content was calculated from the amount of liberated glucose (Goto et al. Reference Goto, Yamada, Ohyama, Matsuo, Odaka and Ikeda1995).
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on intestinal glucose absorption
An intestinal perfusion technique (Swintosky & Pogonowskawala, Reference Swintosky and Pogonowskawala1982) was used to study the effect of fenugreek on intestinal absorption of glucose in 36 h fasted non-diabetic rats anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 g/kg body weight). The SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum (10 mg/ml), equivalent to 0·5 g/kg, suspended in Krebs Ringer buffer, supplemented with glucose (54 g/l), was passed through the pyloris and the perfusate was collected from a catheter inserted at the end of the ileum. The control group received glucose alone. Perfusion was carried out at a constant rate of 0·5 ml/min for 30 min at 37°C. The results are expressed as a percentage of absorbed glucose, calculated from the amount of glucose in solution before and after the perfusion.
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on intestinal disaccharidase activity and gastrointestinal motility
The SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum was administered by a gavage (0·5 g/kg body weight) to 20 h fasted non-diabetic rats. After 60 min, the rats were killed and the small intestine was isolated, cut longitudinally, rinsed with ice-cold saline and homogenized in 10 ml saline (0·9 % NaCl). Aliquots of homogenate were then incubated with 40 mm-sucrose at 37°C for 60 min. Disaccharidase activity was calculated from the glucose concentration converted from sucrose as μmol/mg protein per h. For determination of GI motility, the experiment was carried out according to the method previously described by Chatterjee (Reference Chatterjee1993). After 60 min, BaSO4 milk (10 % w/v in 0·5 % sodium carboxymethyl cellulose) suspension was similarly administered and 15 min later, the rats were killed and the GI tract was excised. The visible distance traversed by BaSO4 milk was measured and expressed as a percentage of the total length of small intestine.
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on insulin secretion
Long-Evans rats (180–250 g) were used for the studies on insulin secretion from the perfused pancreas and isolated islets. Pancreatic perfusion studies were carried out at 37°C according to the method of Giroux et al. (Reference Giroux, Portha, Kergoat, Bailbe and Picon1983). Pancreatic islets were isolated by collagenase digestion (Moskalewski, Reference Moskalewski1969). In both of these studies, SDF fraction of T. foenum-graecum was tested at 30 μg/ml. BRIN-BD11 cells were used to evaluate the effects on insulin secretion in a pure population of insulin-producing cells over a concentration range of 8–5000 μg/ml. The production and characteristics of this clonal cell line have been described in detail elsewhere (McClenaghan et al. Reference McClenaghan, Barnett, Ah-Sing, Abdel-Wahab, O'Harte, Yoon, Swanston-Flatt and Flatt1996).
Effects of soluble dietary fibre of Trigonella foenum-graecum on glucose uptake and insulin action
3T3-L1 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were seeded in twelve-well plates at a density of 100 000 cells per well (Orange Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and fed every 2 d with Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium supplemented with penicillin (50 U/ml), streptomycin (50 μl/ml) and fetal bovine serum (10 %, v/v). Cells were maintained at 37 ± 2°C and 5 % CO2. At confluency, adipocyte differentiation was initiated with 1 μg/ml insulin, 0·5 mm-3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 0·25 μm-dexamethosone. Cells were maintained in this medium for 3 d followed by a further 3 d in medium supplemented with insulin (1 μg/ml) alone. Cells were returned to original medium for 1–2 d followed by incubation in serum-free medium for 2–3 h to establish basal glucose uptake. Cell monolayers were washed and then incubated for 15 min at 37°C in Krebs Ringer buffer supplemented with SDF fraction and insulin as indicated in the figures. After 15 min, glucose uptake was initiated, according to the established protocol of Frost & Lane (Reference Frost and Lane1985), by the addition of 50 μl tritiated 2-deoxyglucose (0·5 μCi/well) plus glucose (50 mm final concentration). This high glucose level was chosen to enable a good signal response to be recorded. The experiment was terminated after 5 min by three rapid washes with ice-cold buffer, after which cells were detached and lysed with 0·1 % SDS and subsequently lysed. Radioactivity was measured on a Wallac 1409 scintillation counter (Wallac, Turke, Finland) and glucose uptake was expressed as dpm (Frost & Lane, Reference Frost and Lane1985).
Analysis
Glucose was measured by the glucose–oxidase method, using kits from Sera Pak (Berkeley, CA, USA). Hepatic glycogen was estimated by using the anthrone method (Vander Vries, Reference Vander Vries1954). Protein contents were determined using the detergent compatible protein kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Total antioxidant status (Cobbaert et al. Reference Cobbaert, Arentsen, Mulder, Hoogerbrugge and Lindemans1997) was determined using ABTS® substrate assay kit according to manufacturer's instructions (Sera Pak). Insulin was measured by ELISA using kits supplied by Crystal Chem. Inc. (Downers Grove, IL, USA) or RIA (Flatt & Bailey, Reference Flatt and Bailey1981). Results are presented as means and standard deviations. Groups of data were compared using unpaired Student's t test and Mann–Whitney U test where appropriate. Where data were collected over a number of time-points, analysis was based on repeated measures ANOVA, with Bonferroni adjustment to ensure an overall error rate of 5 %. One-way ANOVA was performed and pair-wise comparisons to the control group made using Dunnett's test to preserve an overall error rate of 5 %. Differences were considered significant at P < 0·05.