Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum L.) As a Valuable Medicinal Plant

Fenugreek is an medicinal plant that use in disease some therapy. This plant use for blood lipids and
sugar decreasing in diabetic and non diabetic peoples and have antioxidant and antibacterial activity. The
plant contains active constituents such as alkaloids, flavonoids, steroids, Saponins etc. It is an old
medicinal plant. It has been commonly used as a traditional food and medicine. Fenugreek is known to
have hypoglycemic, and hypocholesterolaemic, effects, Anti-inflammatory effects. Recent research has
identified fenugreek as a valuable medicinal plant with potential for curing diseases and also as a source
for preparing raw materials of pharmaceutical industry, like in steroidal hormones. Since fenugreek is a
self-pollinated crop, a mutation breeding method can be used to generate mutants with a determinate
growth habit. Irradiation and chemical mutagens can be used to produce point mutations in fenugreek.
Key Words: Trigonella foenum-graecum L., Fenugreek, Pharmaceutical Effects.
INTRODUCTION
Plants are used medicinally in different countries and are a source of many potent and powerful
drugs . This plant decrease body fats and effective on obesity. Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum
L.), plant is widely distributed throughout the world and which belongs to the family Fabacecae. The
yields can be significant increase in quantity and quality through the suitable management of cultivation,
irrigation and harvesting. In this context, fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum L.), an annual legume, is
extensively cultivated in most regions of the world for its medicinal value (Petropoulos, 2002). In order to
meet the ever increasing demand for medicinal plants, for the indigenous systems of medicine as well as
for the pharmaceutical industry, many medicinal plants need to be cultivated commercially, but soil
salinity and other forms of pollutions represent serious threats to plant production (Qureshi et al. 2005).
Fenugreek leaves and seeds are consumed in different countries around the world for different purposes
such as medicinal uses (anti-diabetic, lowering blood sugar and cholesterol level, anti-cancer, anti-
microbial, etc.), making food (stew with rice in Iran, flavor cheese in Switzerland, syrup and bitter run in
Germany, mixed seed powder with flour for making flat bread in Egypt, curries, dyes, young seedlings
eaten as a vegetable, etc.), roasted grain as coffee-substitute (in Africa), controlling insects in grain
storages, perfume industries, and etc. Fenugreek can be a very useful legume crop for incorporation into
short-term rotation and for hay and silage for livestock feed, for fixation of nitrogen in soil and its
fertility, and etc (Sadeghzadeh-Ahari et al., 2009). Fenugreek seeds have been known and valued as
medicinal material from very early times. Fenugreek as a chemurgic crop has a wide use for industrial
purposes. Its seeds are considered to be of commercial interest as a source of a steroid diosgenin, which is
of importance to the pharmaceutical industry (Mehrafarin et al., 2010). Nowadays, fenugreek is widely
cultivated as a drug plant. The mucilaginous seeds are reputed to have many medicinal virtues, as a tonic,
emollient, carminative, demulcent, diuretic, astringent emmenagogue, expectorant, restorative,
aphrodisiac and vermifugal properties and were used to cure mouth ulcers, chapped lips and stomach
irritation Duke (1986). In Iranian traditional medicine the seeds are used as tonic and blood sugar
lowering (Hajimehdipoor et al., 2010). The biological and pharmacological actions of fenugreek are
attributed to the variety of its constituents, namely: steroids, N-compounds, polyphenolic substances,
volatile constituents, amino acids, etc (Mehrafarin et al., 2010). Fenugreek seed contains 45-60%
carbohydrates, mainly mucilaginous fiber (galactomannans), 20-30% proteins high in lysine and
tryptophan, 5 - 10% fixed oils (lipids), pyridine alkaloids, mainly trigonelline (0.2 - 0.38%), choline
(0.5%), gentianine and carpaine, the flavonoids apigenin, luteolin, orientin, quercetin, vitexin and
isovitexin, free amino acids, such as 4-hydroxyisoleucine (0.09%), arginine, histidine and lysine, calcium
and iron, saponins (0.6 - 1.7%), glycosides yielding steroidal sapogenins on hydrolysis (diosgenin,
yamogenin, tigogenin, neotigogenin), cholesterol and sitosterol, vitamins A, B1, C and nicotinic acid and
0.015% volatile oils (n-alkanes and sesquiterpenes) (Mehrafarin et al., 2010). There are some
possibilities for increasing the chemical constituents contained in the seed, either during the growing
period by using different cultural techniques (Kozlowski et al., 1982; Mohamed, 1990), or during post
harvest treatments by different techniques (enzymes, hormones, etc.) of germination with incubation
(Hardman and Fazli, 1972), different conditions of incubation and fermentation (Elujoba and Hardman,
1985), by storage (Hardman and Fazli, 1972), by the use of tissue and cell culture (static or suspension)
(Khanna and Jain, 1973; Trisonthi et al., 1980) and by biological manipulation of yield (Mehrafarin et al.,
2010; Hardman and Fazli, 1972; Petropoulos, 2002). When fenugreek grown under modern production
techniques, resulted in an increased yielding ability. The yield potential of fenugreek can be defined as
the total biomass produced or agricultural important part of the crop. The total biomass is a result of the
integration of metabolic reactions in the plant. Consequently, any factor influencing the metabolic activity
of the plant at any period of its growth can affect the yield (Ahmed et al., 2010). Metabolic processes of
fenugreek plants are greatly governed by both internal, i.e. genetic make up of the plant and external
conditions which involve two main factors namely climatic and edaphic environmental factors. The yield
potential of fenugreek could be regulated through alternation of genetical make up and reconstitution of
genetical structure through breeding programs and/or by modifications of environment through cultural
treatments (Ahmed et al., 2010; Basu et al., 2009).
General Description
It is an erect hairy annual of the bean family, reaching 30-60 cm. The plant grows to a height of about
three feet, has three part leaves, the long slender stems bear tripartite, toothed, grey-green obovate leaves,
20-25 mm (3/4-1 in) long. Trigonella foenum-graecum has long stalked leaves up to 5 cm long stipules
triangular, lanceolate, leaflets about 2.5 cms long, obovate to obanceolate. The root is a mass of fingery
structures. The sissile axillary flowers are white or pale yellow. The thin, sword-shaped pods are 10-15
cm (4-6 in), with a curved beak-like tip, each carrying 10-20 seeds. The plant radiates a spicy odour
which persists on the hands after touching. Wild and cultivated varieties exist. Flowers are 1-2, axillary,
sessile, racemed, whitish or lemon yellow that bloom from June to July. Pod 5.7 cm long with a persistent
beak, hairy with 10-20 seeds. Mild Mediterranean climates are most suitable. Plants mature in about four
months. The flowering season for the herb fenugreek is generally midsummer. Fenugreek seeds are small
(5 mm. long), hard, and brownish yellow the colour may varies. They are flattened and have a very
characteristic rhomboidal outline. Nearly in the centre of one of the long, narrow sides is a small
depression in which hilum and micropyle are situated, the former being distinctly visible as a whitish
point; this depression is continued in the form of a furrow running diagonally across part of each of the
adjoining sides, thus dividing the seed into two unequal lobes. If the seed is cut in a direction transverse to
the side in which the hilum lies, so as to pass through both lobes of the seed, it will be found that the
larger lobe contains two accumbent cotyledons - the smaller, the radical. Both are yellowish in colour,
and surrounded by a darker, horny, translucent endosperm, which separates the radicle from the
cotyledons. When it is soaked in water the endosperm swells and yields mucilage to the surrounding
liquid. Entire seeds macerated in warm water burst their seed-coats by the swelling of the mucilage, and
disclose the structure of the seed.