Exploring the medicinally important secondary metabolites landscape through the lens of transcriptome data in Trigonella foenum graecum

Seeds of T. foenum graecum (Ajmer Fenugreek 1 (AFG 1) variety) were procured from College of Horticulture, GKVK Campus, Bengaluru with due permission. All the studies on T. foenum graecum were carried out in accordance with relevant institutional, national and international guidelines and legislation. For transcriptome sequencing, RNA from three different tissues leaf, stem and root, was isolated from one month old plants using the Plant Spectrum Plant RNA extraction kit (Sigma Aldrich). These tissue samples, with two biological replicates, were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 1000 platform with 100 base pairs (bp) read length. Trimmomatic was used to process the reads using default settings. A total of 226.5 million reads were obtained after quality processing from six libraries. These reads were assembled de novo using Trinity with default parameters. BUSCO was used to assess the completeness of the transcriptome assembly.
TransDecoder (v3.0.0) was used to identify the candidate coding regions within transcript sequences obtained from Trinity. A length cut off of 100 bases was used to predict Open Reading Frames (ORFs). Function assignment for amino acid sequences was obtained using BLASTP21 against UniProt Viridiplantae database with an E value cut off of 10–522 and domain identification was performed using hmmscan of the HMMER suite (v.3.1b2) against Pfam (v.31.0) using an E value cut off of 10–524. For transcripts, BLASTX21 was performed against the above sequence database with the default parameters. Additional annotation was rendered using SignalP (v.4.0), TMHMM (v.2.0) and RNAmmer (v.1.2) to extract information on signal peptides, transmembrane regions and RNA sequences. Gene ontology (GO) terms, orthologous relationships (eggNOG) and pathway information (KEGG) were also mined.
Orthology analysis of T. foenum graecum was carried out with the well studied model plants Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa and plants which belong to the same tribe as fenugreek (Trifolieae) viz. Trifolium pratense and Medicago truncatula using OrthoMCL31. An E value cut off of 10–5 was used for the all against all BLAST runs. Additionally, 34 different plant species proteomes from Phytozome (v.12)32 were used for large scale orthology analysis using Proteinortho (v5.11)33 (Supplementary Table 1) with an E value cut off of 10–5.
The concatenated nucleotide sequence alignments for ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase large subunit (rbcL), maturase K (matK) and internal transcribed spacer 1 and 2 (ITS1 and ITS2) were used for constructing species phylogenetic tree for the species belonging to subclass Rosids. In case of partial sequences, the alignment was trimmed. The individual sequences were aligned using MAFFT34 with maximum allowance for aligning gapped regions and the separate alignments were concatenated. Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using the Neighbour Joining method implemented in MAFFT with 100 bootstraps. The orthologue distribution obtained from Proteinortho analysis along with their phylogenetic tree for comparison amongst these closely related species was plotted. Through orthogroup analysis, the in paralogous groups and singletons of T. foenum graecum common to both methods were identified. The sequences were compared with each other with respect to their expression profiles in different tissues, Pfam domains22 and GO terms28.
The reads from the three tissues were mapped onto the de novo transcriptome assembly using Bowtie2 (v2.3.0). The expression counts were obtained using eXpress (v1.5.1) and RSEM35,36,37. Transcripts per Million (TPM) values were calculated for all the transcripts. The average TPM value was considered for the biological replicates and compared across the three tissues.
Identification and analysis of genes involved in synthesis of secondary metabolites
The genes involved in synthesis of secondary metabolites belonging to alkaloids, saponins, volatiles and flavonoids, present in T. foenum graecum were identified using strategy adapted from Joshi et al.38. The pathway information and related functional annotation was extracted from multiple sources such as PlantCyc MetaCyc, KEGG and literature11,30,39,40,41,42. The pathway images were adapted from PlantCyc or literature. The sequences for the enzymes involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites serving as start points for sequence search were identified from UniProt22. This was followed with creation and curation of multiple sequence alignment profiles including functionally important residues (FIR), typically used for selecting trusted homologues21,43. Such profiles were implemented to search the transcriptome data for potential hits and were ascertained by presence of the FIRs. The phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor joining method from MEGA (v10)44 for 1000 bootstraps, to assess co clustering of the candidate genes with the curated start points. The phylogenetic trees obtained were visualized and edited in Figtree (v1.4.2)45 and iToL46.
Expression analysis of genes involved in production of important secondary metabolites
The genes identified to be involved in production of secondary metabolites trigonelline and diosgenin were validated using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT PCR). The details of methods used for RNA isolation, qRT PCR quantification are described in the Supplementary Text (Sect. 1.1).
Quantification of diosgenin, trigonelline and 4 hydroxyisoleucine in different tissue samples
The quantification of diosgenin, trigonelline and 4 hydroxyisoleucine was carried out from leaf, stem, root, and seed tissue samples using HLPC PDA method. The details of this method are described in the methods part of Supplementary Text (Sect. 1.2).