Trigonella foenum-graecum seeds extract plays a beneficial role on brain antioxidant and oxidative status in alloxan-induced Wistar rats

Context
Trigonella foenum-graecum (TriFG) exhibits increased scavenger enzymatic activities and reduces the production of reactive oxygen species in diabetic rats.
Objective
The present study was aimed to investigate the effect of TriFG on lipid peroxidation levels and antioxidant status in brain tissue of rats exposed to alloxan.
Materials and Methods
Healthy male rats (180 ± 10 g) were allocated into five groups. Animals in group 1 maintained on normal tap water served as controls and rats in groups 2, 3, 4, and 5 were treated as experimental groups. Rats in group 2 were intraperitoneally injected with alloxan (120 mg/kg BW) and treated as diabetic rats, whereas rats in groups 3 and 4 were maintained on same experimental regimen as that of rats in groups 1 and 2, respectively, and in addition, they were orally gavaged with herbal extracts of TriFG (0.25 g/kg BW). Diabetic rats treated with glibenclamide in group 5 were used as positive controls.
Results and Discussion
Significant (P < 0.001) increase in the antioxidant enzymes with a significant (P < 0.001) decrease in the lipid peroxidation levels were observed in the brain tissue of diabetic rats treated with TriFG extract as compared to diabetic and glibenclamide-treated rats. No significant changes were observed in pro- and antioxidant levels in brain tissue of rats treated with TriFG extract alone when compared to normal rats. In diabetic rats, brain mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes like succinate dehydrogenase, glutamate dehydrogenase, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity levels were significantly (P < 0.05) decreased with reversely increased was observed in lactate dehydrogenase activity (P < 0.05).
Conclusions
The findings of the present study suggested that TriFG, through its antioxidant properties, protects brain tissue by mitigating oxidative stress induced by alloxan-exposed rats. TriFG extract significantly increased the antioxidant and oxidative properties in diabetic rats when compared with the control group rats.