Revisiting Trigonella foenum-graecum L.: Pharmacology and Therapeutic Potentialities 

Despite the incredible advances in medicine development, herbal crops are still widely used for treating and preventing a variety of diseases due to their medicinal and nutraceutical characteristics. Trigonella foenum-graecum L., or also commonly known as fenugreek, is known to be one of the plants with these traits. It is from the family of Fabaceae and is a self-pollinating annual herbaceous aromatic crop, also known as bird’s foot, Greek hayseed, halba, and methi [1]. Its origin is India and Northern Africa; however, it is now widely cultivated in Northern Africa, Europe, South Asia, Argentina, and Australia. Fenugreek is mainly produced in India, which accounts for 80% of the total world production. Fenugreek seeds and leaves are used as a spice and ingredient in culinary preparation in several countries. It is used as a functional and traditional food, as well as in nutraceuticals and physiological application. Because of its high fibre, protein, and gum content, fenugreek has recently been utilized as a food stabilizer and emulsifying agent.
Fenugreek is known to be one of the world’s most ancient medicinal herbs, in relation to which the seeds and leaves are used as a treatment in various ailments [3]. The leaves and seeds of T. foenum-graecum are extensively utilized to make extracts and powder for therapeutic applications in numerous investigations. There have been several preliminary animal and human trials that demonstrated fenugreek exhibiting hypoglycaemic, hypolipidemic, and hypocholesterolemic effects. T. foenum-graecum has also been reported to possess anti-fertility, anticancer, anti-parasitic, and antimicrobial effects [4]. Fenugreek belongs to the Fabaceae family, Trigonella genus, and Foenum-graecum species.
Fenugreek (T. foenum-graecum) seeds sprout in three days once sown in suitable soil. The seedlings grow erect or semi-erect up to 30 to 60 cm of height. It is a self-pollinating annual leguminous bean that aids in soil nourishment and nitrogen fixation. Fenugreek plants are green in colour and slender in shape, with yellow–brown pods bearing 10 to 20 seeds. Fenugreek seeds are brownish-yellow in colour, small, rhomboidal-shaped, and hard seeds are 3 to 6 mm long, 2 to 5 mm wide and 2 mm thick. Crude fenugreek seeds are known for their pleasantly bitter and maple flavour. They are glutinous, fibrous, and sticky in texture and biologically endospermic in nature. A hard centre and yellow embryo is surrounded by a corneous wider layer of white and translucent endosperm in fenugreek seeds [6]. A diosgenin component has been found to be present in the embryo.
Fenugreek seeds consist of 45 to 60% carbohydrates, in which mucilaginous fibre (galactomannans), 20 to 30% proteins high in tryptophan and lysine, 5 to 10% fixed oils (lipids), pyridine alkaloids, mainly choline (0.5%), trigonelline (0.2–0.38%), gentianine, and carpaine, the flavonoids apigenin, orientin, luteolin, quercetin, vitexin, and isovitexin, free amino acids, such as 4-hydroxyisoleucine (0.09%), arginine, lysine, and histidine calcium and iron, saponins (0.6–1.7%), glycosides yielding steroidal sapogenins on hydrolysis (diosgenin, yamogenin, tigogenin, neotigogenin), cholesterol and sitosterol, vitamins B, A, C, and nicotinic acid, and 0.015% volatile oils (n-alkanes and sesquiterpenes).
Fenugreek seed is known to consist of fibre, gum, and various chemical constituents and volatile contents. At an alkaline pH, the protein in fenugreek is more soluble . Fenugreek has a protein content of 23 to 26%, a lipid content of 6 to 7%, and a carbohydrate content of 58%, of which roughly 25% is dietary fibre [6]. Furthermore, fenugreek contains 33 mg of iron per 100 g dry weight, making it a good source of iron. The leaves have an approximate moisture content of 86.1%, 4.4% protein, 0.9% fat, 1.5% minerals, 1.1% fibre, and 6% carbs. Calcium, iron, phosphorus, riboflavin, carotene, thiamine, niacin, and vitamin C are all vitamins and minerals found in the leaves. Fresh fenugreek leaves contain approximately 220.97 mg of ascorbic acid per 100 g of leaves, and approximately 19 mg/100 g of β-carotene is present.
The fenugreek seed has been found to contain a number of chemical compounds, commonly known as phytochemicals. They contain various types of alkaloids, flavonoids, and saponins, with the saponins showing the highest concentration with 4.63 g per 10 g. Fenugreek contains about 35% alkaloids, mainly trigonelline. Fenugreek seeds also contain more than 10 mg of flavonoid per gram of seed, as well as a minor amount of volatile and fixed oils. The oils were rich in linoleic acid (42.71–42.80%), linolenic acid (26.03–26.15%), and oleic acid (14.24–14.40%). Fenugreek essential oil from the seeds (>5%) is rich in neryl acetate (17.3%), camphor (16.3%), β-Pinene (15.05%), β-caryophyllene (14.63%), and 2,5-dimethylpyrazine (6.14%). The phytochemical analysis of fenugreek revealed that the majority of flavonoids occur as glycosides, which are intricate and attributed to C-glycosidic and O-glycosidic bonding with carbohydrates. Flavonol glycosides found in fenugreek include quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside (quercitrin), vitexin-7-Oglucoside (afroside), and apigenin-6-C-glucoside (isovitexin). The alkaloid and volatile compound present are the two main chemical constituents that cause the bitter taste and the odour of the seeds. The seeds of fenugreek contain about 0.1 to 0.9% of diosgenin, which is a type of steroidal sapinogen. Polyphenol chemicals, such as rhaponticin and isovitexin, are known to be the primary bioactive compounds in fenugreek seeds.
The bioactive compounds found in the fenugreek have been determined and isolated by researchers using different methods. One of the most common methods of isolation and characterization is chromatography paired with mass spectrophotometry. The high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system was used to identify and quantify bioactive substances, such as trigonelline, isoorientin, orientin, vitexin, and isovitexin. The high-performance liquid chromatography hybrid electrospray quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometric (HPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS) approach was used to identify bioactive chemicals much faster [9]. The polyphenol in fenugreek extracts was identified using HPLC combined with negative ion electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry and diode array detection in research. Fenugreek seed oil was extracted, and chemical compositions and bonding were assessed using gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analyses in another study. Linoleic acid, palmitic acid, pinene, 4-Pentyl-1-(4-propylcyclohexyl)-1-cyclohexene, and linoleic acid methyl ester were the most abundant components in the extracted oil.
Trigocaumarin, nicotinic acid, and trigonelline are only a few of the alkaloids found in the plant’s stem. The stem also consists of 28% mucilage, volatile and bitter fixed oil, 22% proteins, and yellow colouring substance. Table 1 shows the vitamin profile of fenugreek, whereas Table 2 summarises the chemical contents found in fenugreek seed, while Figure 1 depicts their chemical structures and pharmacological effects.