Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) - Uses, Side Effects, and More

Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) is an herb similar to clover. The seeds taste similar to maple syrup and are used in foods and medicine.
Fenugreek is native to the Mediterranean, Europe, and Asia. Fenugreek seems to slow sugar absorption in the stomach and stimulate insulin. Both of these effects lower blood sugar in people with diabetes. Fenugreek might also improve levels of testosterone and estrogen, helping to improve interest in sex.
People commonly use fenugreek for diabetes, menstrual cramps, sexual problems, enlarged prostate, high cholesterol, obesity, and many other conditions, but there is no good scientific evidence to support most of these uses.
Possibly Effective for
Diabetes. Taking fenugreek seed by mouth seems to lower blood sugar levels in people with diabetes.
Menstrual cramps (dysmenorrhea). Taking fenugreek seed powder by mouth might reduce painful menstrual periods.
Increasing response to sexual stimuli in healthy people. Taking a specific fenugreek seed extract (Testofen, Gencor Pacific Ltd) by mouth seems to improve ability and interest in sex in males.
Sexual problems that prevent satisfaction during sexual activity. Taking a specific fenugreek seed extract (Libifem, Gencor Pacific Ltd.) by mouth seems to increase interest in sex in healthy younger females with a low sex drive.
Possibly Ineffective for
Enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH). Taking fenugreek extract by mouth doesn't seem to improve BPH symptoms.
There is interest in using fenugreek for a number of other purposes, but there isn't enough reliable information to say whether it might be helpful.
When taken by mouth: Fenugreek is commonly consumed in foods. It is possibly safe when the powdered seed is taken for up to 3 years. Side effects may include diarrhea, stomach upset, bloating, and gas. It may also cause allergic reactions in some people. 
Special Precautions and Warnings
When taken by mouth: Fenugreek is commonly consumed in foods. It is possibly safe when the powdered seed is taken for up to 3 years. Side effects may include diarrhea, stomach upset, bloating, and gas. It may also cause allergic reactions in some people. Pregnancy: Fenugreek is commonly consumed in foods. It is likely unsafe when used in greater amounts. It might cause malformations in the baby, as well as early contractions. Taking fenugreek just before delivery may cause the newborn to have an unusual body odor. This unusual body odor doesn't seem to be harmful, but it could be confused with a condition called "maple syrup urine disease."
Breast-feeding: Fenugreek is possibly safe when taken by mouth to increase breastmilk flow. Taking fenugreek 1725 mg three times daily for 21 days doesn't seem to cause any side effects in infants.
Children: Fenugreek is commonly consumed in foods. But there isn't enough reliable information to know if fenugreek is safe when taken in larger amounts. An unusual body and urine odor has been reported after drinking fenugreek tea. This doesn't seem to be harmful, but it could be confused with a condition called "maple syrup urine disease."
Allergies: People who are allergic to other plants in the Fabaceae family, including soybeans, peanuts, green peas, and other legumes, might also be allergic to fenugreek.
Surgery: Fenugreek might slow blood clotting. It might cause extra bleeding during and after surgery. Stop taking fenugreek at least 2 weeks before a scheduled surgery.
