Punica Granatum with Multiple Effects in Chronic Diseases

Introduction
Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) has a prominent medical history and is reported to possess significant medicinal properties (Longtin, 2003). Pomegranate is native in Iran, Northern India and several Mediterranean countries (Stover and Mercure, 2007). Pomegranate has attracted considerable attention for its various therapeutic functions in recent years.

Download CSVDisplay Table
Studies clearly demonstrated that pomegranates were able to serve as a natural choice for chemical treatment owing to their effectiveness in treating chronic diseases.

The results provide significant information about the compound of pomegranate phytochemical, polyphenolic, antioxidant, anti-carcinogenic, and anti-inflammatory properties, which have cancer prevention and therapeutic activity. In addition, it is beneficial to prevent cardiovascular, atherosclerosis, and diabetes diseases. Pomegranate juice shows activity against cutaneous leishmaniasis. The leishmanicidal activity of pomegranate juice is mainly triggered by its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities (Alkathiri et al., 2017a). Additionally, pomegranate indicated high activity in oral and dental health promotion, prevention activity against bacterial and antibiotic resistance infections, as well as skin damage arising from ultraviolet radiation (Adhami et al., 2009; Ahangari and Sargolzaei, 2012; Akbarpour et al., 2009; Ismail et al., 2012).

This systematic review aimed to summarize the present data from in-vitro and in-vivo experiments and human clinical trials of the medical activities of pomegranate products. This review highlights the pomegranate potential role in the prevention and treatment of hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, inflammation, atherosclerosis, Alzheimer, osteoarthritis and cancer.

Scientific Pomegranate Classification
Pomegranate is broadly cultivated and considered native in Iran and the north of India. Pomegranate (Punica granatum) is an old, unique fruit that is under the subclass Rosidae, order Myrtales (Stover and Mercure, 2007).

Pomegranate is a spiny plant, deciduous, with multiple trunks, funnel-shaped red flowers in singles or in clusters of up to five, and small slender leaves. Pomegranate is regarded to have originated in Iran then moved to the north of India (Stover and Mercure, 2007). The fruit is round with a crown at the base created by the corolla. The skin is tough and leathery in tissue, yellow, dark pink, red and dark red in color (Longtin, 2003).

Punica Granatum L. Compound
Pomegranate is a significant source of a combination of bioactive compounds and has been used for traditional medicine throughout history. Most compounds of the pomegranate extract are tannin and polyphenolics (Amakura et al., 2000). Phytochemical analyzes indicated the active inhibitors in pomegranate peels, such as polyphenolic and flavonoids (Ben Nasr et al., 1996). Pomegranate peel has ellagitannins, ellagic acid, gallic acid (Mertens-Talcott et al., 2006), hydroxybenzoic acids such as ellagic acid, gallagic acid, and ellagic acid glycosides (Noda et al., 2002). Anthocyanidins include mainly cyanidin, pelargonidin, and delphinidin (Van Elswijk et al., 2004), as well as flavonoids such as luteolin, kaempferol, and quercetin (Middha et al., 2013). The antioxidant content of various cultivars of pomegranate plays a probable role in prevention of different diseases associated with oxidative stress such as cancer, as well as cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases (Bassiri-Jahromi and Doostkam, 2019; Mohan et al., 2010).

Murthy et al. (Murthy et al., 2004) quantified the pomegranates peel extract by the chromatographic method (i.e. HPLC) and reported that the peel extracts contained the gallic acid (34.03%) and catechin (3.31%).

Middha et al. (Middha et al., 2013) revealed significant antioxidant activity, polyphenolic, nutritive content, and phenolic specifications in the pomegranate peel extract.

Middha et al. in their high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method investigation on the phenolic specification of methanolic extracts indicated that punicalagin contained major ellagitannin and approximately five various flavonoids, phenolic acids, and their derivatives.

Akbarpour et al. (Akbarpour et al., 2009) in their (HPLC) physical and chemical analysis analyzed 12 pomegranate cultivars cultivated in different regions of Iran. The results indicated that ellagic acid content of juice and peel ranged between 1–2.38 mg/100 ml and 10–50.00 mg/100 g, respectively. Total antioxidant acting was measured by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) assay with a range of 225.17–705.50 (mmol/100 g) and 157.33–419.33 (mmol/100 ml) in peel and juice, respectively.

Safety and Toxicity of Pomegranate
Pomegranate and its component have been used since old time without adverse effects (Wang and Martins-Green, 2014). Pomegranate peel extract had no adverse effects following application in the mice model at concentrations commonly used in traditional medicine (Vidal et al., 2003). Pomegranate extracts may be used without a high risk by healthy individuals. No adverse effects on the liver or renal function were observed upon pomegranate administration of 1420 mg/day extract tablets in humans (Viladomiu et al., 2013).

Pomegranate extracts contain powerful antioxidant properties. Therefore, pomegranate can play a potential role as medicinal plant supplements to provide an alternative appropriate form for the bioactive polyphenols usage (Heber et al., 2007). There have been few studies documenting human safety assessment. Vidal et al. reported that pomegranate had no adverse effects and risk of toxic activation following application in the mice model. The results indicated that two doses (0.4 and 1.2 mg/kg) of extract application had no adverse effects, and no toxic activity in terms of biochemical factors, weight gain, food intake, or behavioral in the mice model (Vidal et al., 2003).

In one study, Cerdá et al. (Cerdá et al., 2003) orally used pomegranate peel extract with high doses in rats for 37 days. No important differences were observed in toxicity in the treated rats in any of the blood parameters, liver and kidneys analyzed. (Cerdá et al., 2003). Pomegranate peel extract application was effective and safe in the treatment of oral candidiasis in Wistar rats. Heber et al. (Viladomiu et al., 2013) reported that pomegranate peel extract had no significant adverse events following application in human subjects studied to evaluate pomegranate extract dietary supplements. Another investigation in carotid artery stenosis patients showed that the pomegranate juice used for up to 3 years had no toxic effects on the liver, kidney, blood chemistry, and heart functions (Aviram et al., 2004). Patel et al. (Patel et al., 2008) reported that the pomegranate extract application did not change in clinical observations, and no adverse effects were found in the hematology and serum chemistry parameters.

Bassiri-Jahromi et al. (Bassiri-Jahromi et al., 2015b) in their studies clearly demonstrated that application of three different doses of pomegranate peel extract in BALB/c mice caused no toxic effects, weight gain, and behavioral or biochemical blood factors. Biochemical assessment indicated no disorders in glucose, cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) following application of three different doses of pomegranate peel extract in Wistar rats. Furthermore, pomegranate peel extract application with a therapeutic dose in the mice model showed normal histopathological examinations with no inflammation.

The evidence demonstrate that P. granatum peel extract can be used with possible applications for some diseases.

Pomegranate has been widely used in different cultures and countries since ancient time, without undesirable effects; therefore, it is generally considered safe. However, Squillaci et al. (Squillaci and Di Maggio, 1946) reported that consumption of decoction of the tree bark could induce intense acute gastric inflammation due to presence of tannins and alkaloids. Vidal et al. (Vidal et al., 2003) in their study showed internal organs congestion and elevated creatinine in in vivo after whole fruit extracts consumption.

Fatope et al. (Fatope et al., 2002), in their study indicated that the pomegranate seed oil was not toxic for shrimp larvae, but allergic reactions were reported after using the fruit (Gaig et al., 1992; Hegde et al., 2002; Igea et al., 1991).

Hepato-protective Activity
Recent investigations indicated protective effects on the liver injury and the hepato-protective activity of pomegranate (Middha et al., 2013; Sen et al., 2010; Thresiamma and Kuttan, 1996). To observe the protective effects of pomegranate peel extracts on oxidative stress in mice, XU et al. (Xu et al., 2008) in their study evaluated the protective effects of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) GSH and Malondialdehyde (MDA) levels in the plasma and antioxidant capacities of the liver. The results indicated that pomegranate peel extracts had a significant protective capacity against oxidative stress in mice loaded with restraint stress, which is probably related to its free radical activity and lipid peroxidation inhibitory effects. Serum enzymes such as aspartate aminotransferase (AST), low-density hyperglycemia (LDH), alkaline phosphatase transferase (ALT), and cytokine levels were extremely reduced. In the liver fibrosis, the AST, LDH, ALT, and cytokine levels in the serum were high (Xu et al., 2008). Toklu et al. (Toklu et al., 2007) in their investigation showed that persistent administration of pomegranate peel extract decreased the bile duct ligation inducing oxidative injury of the liver and recovered the hepatic function. Kaur et al. showed that pomegranate flowers have considerable content of hepatoprotective and antioxidant properties. Pomegranate flower extract possesses considerable antioxidant and hepatoprotective property properties against Ferric Nitrilotriacetate (Fe-NTA) (Kaur et al., 2006).

Murthy et al. (Murthy et al., 2002) indicated that the pomegranate peel extract antioxidant and anti-fibrotic capacity might have therapeutic worthiness in protecting the hepatic fibrosis and oxidative injury. An in-vivo study on mice fed with pomegranate peel extract indicated that the extract had protective effects against carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) toxicity (Choi et al., 2015).

Ashoush et al. (Ashousha et al., 2013) evaluated antioxidant activity of pomegranate peel powder (PPP) and detected and quantified its hepatoprotective effects in Wistar rats versus carbon tetrachloride (CCL4) inducing liver damage for 28 days. The results indicated that pomegranate peel powder exhibited antioxidant effects. Furthermore, in an in-vivo study on rats fed with 10% pomegranate peel powder on diets supplemented for 28 days indicated potential hepato protective efficacy compared to the control group (Ashousha et al., 2013).

Ibrahim et al. in their molecular and histopathological investigation indicated that pomegranate could decrease CCl4-induced sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c (SREBF1) c expression and then normalize lipid peroxidation (Ibrahim et al., 2016). These results confirm that pomegranate possesses hepato protective potency on the liver tissue damage versus CCl4-induced oxidative stress.

Pomegranate juice can increase the antioxidants activity, protect the kidney against carbon tetrachloride-induced reproductive toxicity, inhibit the lipid peroxidation and nitric oxide production, and clean free radicals, as well as lessen oxidative damage (Longtin, 2003; Stover and Mercure, 2007).

Anti- Hyperglycemic Activity
Diabetes has become a pandemic affecting approximately 5% of people in the world and causes high mortality. Diabetes is the second leading cause of death after cancer (Huang et al., 2005)

Pomegranate peel possesses anti-hyperglycemic activity (Dell’agli et al., 2010). Nogueira et al., followed by Tang et al. (Tang et al., 2018) and Nozire et al. (Nozire and Serpil, 1993) and supported by other studies (Althunibat et al., 2010; Bagri et al., 2009; Khalil, 2004; Parmar and Kar, 2007; Wang et al., 2015), explicated the first report on the anti-hyperglycemic activity of pomegranate peel using an in vivo model (Nogueira and Pereira, 1984).

The results of in-vivo investigations revealed that pomegranate extract could increase insulin and decrease blood glucose in normal and diabetic rats. They also showed the extract could increase the number of pancreatic ß-cells in normal and diabetic rats (Middha et al., 2012).

Increase in the insulin level following experimental animals fed with pomegranate peel extract showed the recovery of pancreatic ß-cells and indicated the anti-hyperglycemic and antioxidant activity of pomegranate peel extract. These investigations have shown valuable results in both in vivo and in vitro studies. Supplementation of diabetic rats with pomegranate peel extract indicated that pomegranate peel extract could improve brain oxidative stress in diabetic rats by decreasing the lipid and protein oxidation up-regulating the antioxidant defense mechanism.

Pomegranate peel extract may be applied as a possible therapeutic agent in prohibition of brain diabetic complications (Middha et al., 2012). In an in-vivo study on diabetic rats fed with pomegranate peel extract for 21 days, it was showed that their levels of blood glucose decreased (Khalil, 2004). Bagri et al. in their in-vivo investigation on diabetic rats treated with pomegranate peel extract for 4 weeks showed a significant reduction in the blood sugar rate and an increase in the number of β cells, which helps to increase the insulin level, respectively.

The pomegranate peel extract anti-diabetic activity contributes to stimulation, regeneration, and increase of β cells number, by pancreatic tissue supporting and followed by insulin releasing. In addition, it is possible to increases the activity and stimulation of insulin receptor (Bagri et al., 2009)

Phytochemical research indicated that the gallic acid was mostly responsible for this activity (Wang et al., 2015); the activity may be caused by the presence of terpenoids such as ursolic acid and oleanolic acid, which may help to erase the free radicals generated in diabetes.

Middha et al. in their in vitro glucose oxidase technique investigations revealed that pomegranate peel extract application had anti-hyperglycemic activity (Middha et al., 2012).

Al-Aboudi et al. (Al-Aboudi and Afifi, 2011) and Das et al. (Das and Sarajita Barman, 2012) in their investigation showed that pomegranate peel extract contained anti-diabetic activity. Pomegranate peel extracts have potential polyphenolic compounds content, and they could be applied in diabetes and its related complications management (Sen et al., 2010). The antioxidants content of pomegranate are connected to the pomegranate sugars, which have been shown helpful in diabetic patients (Huang et al., 2005).

In conclusion, pomegranate peel extract may reduce hyperglycemia through regeneration of β cells. In this regard, considerable differences among the cultivars were demonstrated in most measured factors such as total polyphenolics, flavonoids, antioxidant activity, and anthocyanins content.

Anti-hyperlipidemic Effect
Sadeghipour et al. (Sadeghipour et al., 2014) in rats with a heavy lipid diet for 23 days measured pomegranate peel extract in most measured factors such as blood cholesterol, triglycerides, Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), High-density lipoprotein (HDL), alkaline phosphatase (AP),alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). In this regard, the pomegranate peel extract significantly reduced total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C), alkaline phosphatase, AST, and ALT levels in serum. It also increased HDL-C in rats with a high lipid diet compared to the control group in serum. Histopathological studies indicated that the pomegranate peel extract treatment decreased liver damage in rats with a heavy lipid diet compared to the control group. Pomegranate peel extracts significantly decreased the body weight in treated rats (Sadeghipour et al., 2014). Cheng et al. conducted an in-vivo comparative evaluation on the Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats in 28 days, to clarify the hypo-lipidemic activity of pomegranate peel and polyphenolic compound (Cheng et al., 2005). The results indicated that pomegranate peel extract was effective in decreasing serum and hepatic lipids.

Parmar et al. in their investigation showed that pomegranate peel extract caused to reduce the TC, TG, LDL-c, VLDL-C levels and tissue LPO level with boost on HDL-c, GSH content following oral application for 21 days (Parmar and Kar, 2007). A pilot investigation in patients with type 2 diabetic indicated that pomegranate juice extract decreased the cholesterol absorption, had suitable efficacy on cholesterol metabolism enzymes, increased cholesterol fecal excretion, reduced LDL, and improved LDL/HDL and total/HDL ratios (Nogueira and Pereira, 1984). Punica granatum flower extract has potential to improve abnormal cardiac lipid metabolism in Zucker diabetic rats by promoting the proliferator-activated receptor alpha – PPAR-α – followed by reduction of the circulating lipid and inhibition of its cardiac uptake (Huang et al., 2005). Pomegranate possesses protective effect on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) from oxidation compared to other antioxidants, and it may help to decrease atherosclerosis progress and cardiovascular inflammation (Aviram and Rosenblat, 2012). In addition, pomegranate has an antioxidant capacity, which is unique to increase acting of the HDL-associated para-oxonase1 (PON1), decomposing incompatible oxidized lipids in lipoproteins, atherosclerotic plaques, and macrophages (Aviram and Rosenblat, 2013).

Therefore, pomegranate can play a potential role in reduction of blood lipoprotein. All advantageous characteristics make the pomegranate a unique healthful fruit. Owing to the pomegranate health benefits, it should be considered a considerable candidate for future investigations in this field.

Antioxidant Activity
Pomegranate peel extracts contain powerful phytochemicals and antioxidant activity. Strong antioxidant potency of pomegranate peel extract may be owing to its major polyphenolics containing such asellagic acid activity (Syed et al., 2013).

Singh et al. (Singh et al., 2012) explained the first report of pomegranate peel extract antioxidant activity. The antioxidant potential of pomegranate peel extract is significantly superior to the pulp extract (10 times higher) (Li et al., 2006). Furthermore, pomegranate peel extract has a powerful capacity in cleaning hydroxyl and superoxide anion radical (Kaneyuki et al., 1999). Pomegranates are offered as two functional factors combining aldose reductase repressive activity with antioxidant actions. Pomegranate seed oil and peel and juice have a rich source of polyphenolic compounds, making them to have a significant antioxidant capacity. Pomegranate peel extracts contain cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases, which are able to inhibit pro-inflammatory enzymes (M I et al., 2000; Murthy et al., 2002; Schubert et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2012).

In vitro and in vivo studies on rats with damaged liver showed the anti-atherogenic potential of polyphenolic flavonoids. The polyphenolic flavonoids inhibit macrophage-mediated oxidation of LDL and reduce atherogenesis (Aviram and Fuhrman, 1998). The results of an investigation by Al-Olayan et al. in the mice model show that pomegranate juice increases the antioxidants defense mechanism versus carbon tetrachloride-induced reproductive toxicity (CCl4) and provides the evidence that it may play a therapeutic role in free radical-mediated diseases (Al-Olayan et al., 2014). In an in-vivo study on rats fed with pomegranate peel, it was indicated that pomegranate peel provided protective activity to carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) toxicity (Murthy et al., 2002). Pomegranate pulp extract has the potential to inhibit the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) expression and IL–1β induced tissue destruction (Murthy et al., 2002).

Barathikannan et al. indicated that the pomegranate extracts contained phytochemicals activities that can donate hydrogen to a free radical. Pomegranate peel extract has the potential to decrease the stable radical diphenyl-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) to diphenylpicryl hydrazine (Barathikannan et al., 2016).

Pomegranate peel extract are highly scavenged DPPH radicals, which may be owing to the ability of peel extract proton-donating in aggregation with the hydroxyl groups to stabilize free radicals (Brand-Williams et al., 1995; Nair et al., 2016).

Anti- Inflammation Effect
Marques et al. (Marques et al., 2016) in their investigation showed that pomegranate leaves extract had anti-inflammatory effects following application in the mice model. The results indicated that pomegranate leaves extract suppresses the levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in acute inflammation.

Colombo et al. (Colombo et al., 2013) indicated that pomegranate peel, flower, seed, and juice extracts possessed considerable anti-inflammatory efficacy in the intestine. Panichayupakaranant et al. revealed the potential use of pomegranate peel extract for antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic activities (Panichayupakaranant et al., 2010). The major anti-inflammatory component of pomegranate is punicic acid. It is an important anti-inflammatory compound to inhibit prostaglandin production (Murthy et al., 2002). Pomegranate seed oil can play a potential role in inhibition of the lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase enzymes, which are the main enzymes in production of various inflammatory mediators (Vidal et al., 2003). Pomegranate anti-inflammatory activity may be owing to its immune regulatory action on T and B lymphocytes and macrophages (Colombo et al., 2013). Pomegranate contain polyphenolic properties, and the compound of polyphenols and its antioxidant content contain the cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases aspro-inflammatory enzyme inhibitors (Aviram and Fuhrman, 1998; M I et al., 2000; Murthy et al., 2002; Schubert et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2012); Therefore, pomegranate may be suggested as a potential anti-inflammatory fruit. Houstonab et al. (Houstonab et al., 2017), in their ex vivo investigation indicated that topically applied pomegranate tannins and pomegranate rind extract showed a significant anti-inflammatory activity in ex vivo skin on the cyclooxygenase-2 expression.

This finding illustrates that the pomegranate peel is a valuable source of polyphenolic compounds, known as punicalagin, which has an anti-inflammatory capacity and affects the skin and modulate cyclooxygenase-2 expression.

Epidermal Proliferation and Cosmetic Effect
Pomegranate seed oil can elevate skin repair activity and stimulated keratinocyte proliferation without affecting fibroblast function. It also facilitates skin repair and promotes regeneration of dermis and epidermis.

According to the report by Aslam et al. (Aslam et al., 2006), pomegranate peel extract is able to regenerate and promote dermis, and pomegranate seed oil is able to regenerate epidermis.

Various pomegranate fractions might be used as skin repair agents. The results of investigations on phenolic compounds by Brennan et al. (Brennan et al., 2003) indicated that pomegranate peel extract might prevent the major enzyme Matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) elaboration, which is responsible for collagen damages in aged and photo skin (Griffiths et al., 1993).

Pomegranate peel extract is also able to induce pro-collagen (type I) production by dermal fibroblasts. It is believed that for skin repair, rebuilding of the disturbed collagen is necessary (Banihani et al., 2013; Griffiths et al., 1993; Kligman and Balin, 1989; Talwar et al., 1995; Yang et al., 2001).

Alkathiri et al. demonstrated that pomegranate juice improved lesion healing and parasite resolution in BALB/c mice infected with Leishmania major (Alkathiri et al., 2017b). Keratinocyte proliferation is stimulated by pomegranate seed oil in cell culture and organ culture, however, it had little activity on fibroblast function. Therefore, these combined dermal and epidermal pomegranate activities are similar to biologically retinoid activities (Quirynen et al., 2006). Accordingly, it is possible to use these fractions for skin repair activity.

Anti-Cancer Effect
There is a shifting focus on natural compounds, due to the current problems of chemotherapeutic regimens. Pomegranate has been widely accepted for its anti-proliferative effect and anticancer activity against human prostate, colon, oral, and breast-cancer cell lines. Pomegranate has been demonstrated in inflammation and cancer prevention and treatment, and it has been shown to efficient against oxidative damage in diabetic rats (Adhami et al., 2009; Bassiri-Jahromi, 2018; Kligman and Balin, 1989; Longtin, 2003; Malik et al., 2005; Malik and Mukhtar, 2006; Menezes et al., 2006; Syed et al., 2013).

Pomegranate contain polyphenols, which are reported to be responsible for anti-carcinogenic activities by in-vitro and in-vivo investigations (Ahmed et al., 2014; Banihani et al., 2013; Ben Nasr et al., 1996; Dahlawi et al., 2013; Longtin, 2003; Mehta et al., 2014; Quirynen et al., 2006). Pomegranate extract induces apoptosis and inhibits cancer cells proliferation. In addition, pomegranate juice induces considerable apoptosis in lymphoid and myeloid leukemia cell lines, with cell cycle arrest (Mehta et al., 2014). Pomegranate extract has been indicated to have promising anti-tumor activity in various organs (Yang et al., 2001).

Adhami et al. (Adhami et al., 2009) reported that pomegranate extracts prevented the growth of prostate, breast, colon, and lung cancer cells in in vitro cultures. Furthermore, oral application of pomegranates extract prevented lung, skin, colon and prostate tumors growth in preclinical animal studies (Adhami et al., 2009).In an initial phase II clinical trial, pomegranate juice has been reported to possess strong activity in prolongation of prostate-specific antigen doubling time in patients with prostate cancer. In experimental studies, pomegranate seed oil has been demonstrated to prevent proliferation of different tumor cell types (Albrecht et al., 2004; Dahlawi et al., 2013; Kawaii and Lansky, 2004; Kim et al., 2002) and skin carcinogenesis reduction in the mouse mammary organ culture (Hora et al., 2003). Several studies indicated that remarkable natural synergies existed among polyphenols and phytochemicals in pomegranate juice (Lansky et al., 2005).

Pomegranate peel extracts have been indicated to delay various human cancer cell lines proliferation (Hora et al., 2003; Lansky et al., 2005; Mavlyanov et al., 1997; Viuda-Martos et al., 2010). Adams et al. (Adams et al., 2006), in their investigation indicated the anti-carcinogenic potent of the phytochemicals in pomegranate. The total tannins content in pomegranate juice was compared to purified ellagic acid and its precursor punicalagin. All of them reduced the viable human oral and colon tumor cell number; pure pomegranate juice has superior antioxidant potency and was considered to be the best effective antioxidant tested compared to punicalagin. Additionally, pomegranate juice stimulated apoptosis. However, tannins content in pomegranate juice has not efficacy (Larrosa et al., 2006). The pomegranate juice also possesses phytochemicals such as flavonoids and anthocyanins, which have been recognized with antioxidant and anti-proliferative activity (Seeram et al., 2005). The synergistic act of the pomegranate ingredients is superior to single constituents (Seeram et al., 2005).

Anti- Atherosclerosis, Cardiovascular and Heart Diseases Prevention
The results of a number of investigations have indicated that pomegranate juice act as a natural blood thinner. In this regard, pomegranate juice is capable to elevate the blood flow to the heart while regressing arterial plaque. Pomegranate juice has excellent antioxidant activity and is beneficial for atherosclerosis prevention, however, pomegranate juice alone would not act as a potent blood thinner in heart diseases (M I et al., 2000). The main part of pomegranate seed oil is punicic acid having anti-atherogenic effects (Zarfeshany et al., 2014). Pomegranate juice has been widely accepted for its high-level antioxidant activity and is effective in atherosclerosis inhibition. Animal trial systems and human clinical trials suggest that pomegranate juice have anti-atherogenic activity in atherosclerotic mice and humans (Aviram and Rosenblat, 2012; Huang et al., 2005; Kaplan et al., 2001). Al-Jarallah et al. (Al-Jarallah et al., 2013) in their in-vivo investigation indicated that pomegranate was beneficial for heart conditions and blood vessels, including heart attack, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, congestive heart failure (CHF), and atherosclerosis (Al-Jarallah et al., 2013).

Mohan et al. (Mohan et al., 2010) indicated that pomegranate extract and its components had a high inhibition capacity against the cardio-toxic activity induced by isoproterenol, and it contains a considerable therapeutic value in prevention of myocardial infarction in Wistar rats.

One study by Al-Jarallah et al. (Al-Jarallah et al., 2013) showed that pomegranate extract decreased aortic sinus and coronary artery atherosclerosis in mice models. This protective pomegranate activity was attributed to oxidative stress and inflammation decrease in the vessel wall, but it did not change inflammation systemic markers and increased lipoprotein cholesterol in the mice model.

Pomegranate is a valuable source of polyphenols and antioxidants agents making it strong anti-atherogenic agents (Sen et al., 2010). The bioactive phenolic compounds of pomegranate have significant antioxidant potency against free radical activities (Aviram and Rosenblat, 2013).

Anti-Alzheimer
An in-vivoindicated that mice treated with pomegranate juice had significantly less accumulation of soluble A beta 42 and amyloid deposition in the hippocampus. Pomegranates contain very high levels of antioxidant polyphenols, which inhibit nuclear factor of activated T-cell activity and microglial activation in vitro and in the mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease (Hartman et al., 2006; Rojanathammanee et al., 2013).

This offers that the microglial activity may be a promising therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer’s disease.

Pomegranate juice reduces amyloid load and improves action in Alzheimer’s disease in the mice model. In one study, Hartman et al., (2006) indicated 50% less amyloid deposition and soluble A beta 42 accumulation in the mice hippocampus treated by pomegranate juice as compared to the control group, which would be considered to improve Alzheimer’s disease.

Rojanathammanee et al. (Rojanathammanee et al., 2013) reported that some components of the pomegranate extract, such as punicalagin and ellagic acid, have potential to be absorbed and to enter the brain in order to inhibit microglial action via debilitation of nuclear factor of activated T-cell activity. Ropacki et al. (Ropacki et al., 2013) in their human clinical trial study indicated that the pomegranate peel extract had memory retention efficacy improvement with particular strong and long-lasting protective effects in the memory retention domain, in elective cardiac surgery patients after treated with pomegranate extract as compared to the placebo group after surgery. They indicated that pomegranate could improve cognitive functions in humans, and indicated postsurgical memory improvement in the pomegranate group treated with especial strong and long-lasting protection, across all of the memory domains that they tested.

Sarkaki et al. (Sarkaki et al., 2015) in their in-vivo investigation indicated that oral pomegranate feeding seed extract in rats for 14 days, was able to improve active and passive avoidance memory and learning in permanent cerebral ischemia. Pomegranate has high levels of antioxidant polyphenolic compounds that can be neuroprotective in various model systems. Braidy et al. (Braidy et al., 2013) demonstrated that pomegranate extract possessed protective effects on the neurotoxin activity of 1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) in human neurons, and MPTP was the environmental toxin, which could induce oxidative damage and mitochondrial selectively and proteasomal disturbance to dopaminergic neurons.

The protection mechanisms may be associated with antioxidant effects of phenolic constituents. Oral feeding of pomegranate extract inhibited Cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and COX-2 enzymes. It also inhibited Interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) induced Nitric oxide (NO) and Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production (Farzaei et al., 2015).

Anti- Osteoarthritis Effect
In human osteoarthritis, pomegranate extract prevents the interleukin-1β-induced activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 3(MKK-3), P38α mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38α-MAPK), and transcription factor Runt-related transcription factor 2(RUNX-2) in chondrocytes. The interleukin- 1β enhanced activation pathway in human osteoarthritis chondrocytes (Shukla et al., 2008).

Rasheed et al.(Rasheed et al., 2010) showed that pomegranate extract played a probable role in human osteoarthritis chondrocytes pretreatment through prevention of the IL-1β-induced activation of the upstream kinase MKK3, resulting in the blocking of p38α-MAPK isoform as well as the activity and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) binding acting of the transcription factor RUNX-2. Therefore, the pomegranate extract or its ingredients may be beneficial in inhibition the capacity to activate MKK3 and transcription factor RUNX-2 in human osteoarthritis chondrocytes. Activation of p38-MAPK in human osteoarthritis chondrocytes was preferentially mediated via activation of MKK3. Additionally, polyphenol-rich pomegranate extract inhibited the IL-1β-induced activation of MKK3, p38α-MAPK isoform, and DNA binding activity of the transcription factor RUNX-2 (Rasheed et al., 2010).

Summary of Evidence on Treatment Effectiveness
Pomegranate has been used in the inhibition and treatment of several diseases among various cultures and civilizations. The potential therapeutic quality of P. granatum peel covers an extensive range, including cancer treatment and prevention based on laboratory and clinical evidence (Quirynen et al., 2006; Rasheed et al., 2010), antimicrobial (Abdollahzdeh et al., 2011; Anibal et al., 2013; Doostkam et al. 2019), antifungal based on in-vitro and in-vivo evidence (Bassiri-Jahromi et al., 2015a, 2018), and antiviral (Reddy et al., 2014), anti-diabetes (Salwe et al., 2015), leishmanicidal activity and anti-inflammatory properties (Alkathiri et al., 2017b; Imperatori et al., 2018).

Pomegranates can help to prevent or treat cardiovascular diseases in Wistar rats (Mohan et al., 2010), and diabetes in hyperglycemic rats (Salwe et al., 2015), as well as denture stomatitis and mouth lesions in cultured cells (Tavassoli-Hojjati et al., 2014).

In the clinical trial study, pomegranate showed protective effects against UVA- and UVB-induced cell damage and reduced the toxicity induced by UV light on skin fibroblasts and keratinocytes (Pacheco-Palencia et al., 2008).

Pomegranates have therapeutic potential to reduce the brain oxidative damage in the mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease (Subash et al., 2014), and cerebral ischemia in the rat model and in humans (Bassiri-Jahromi, 2018; Nasiri et al., 2017; West et al., 2007).

All these antioxidative and anti-arthritis effects were clearly demonstrated in human chondrocytes (Rasheed et al., 2010), skin lesions in rats (Nasiri et al., 2017), and obesity and lipid-lowering effects in rats (Mo et al., 2014). Furthermore, therapeutic potential in various preclinical models was observed in malaria by in vitro (Dell’agli et al., 2010), prostate cancer in clinical trials (Malik et al., 2005), atherosclerosis in mice (Kaplan et al., 2001), hypertension in Wistar rats (Mohan et al., 2010).

Thikunchai et al. (Thikunchai et al., 2005) reported that pomegranate contained 25% tannins, making it an effective astringent.

Many researchers have focused on the biological activity of pomegranate peels, to detect many agents for human health. The polyphenols have been illustrated to have elevating health and preventive disease activity. The free radicals have been demonstrated to stimulate and exacerbate many diseases such as arthritis, cancer, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and diabetes (Rout and Banerjee, 2007).

These resulted that pomegranate peel could be used as a potential source of natural antioxidant agents.

Conclusion
The therapeutic potential of pomegranate seems to be in various aspects. Thus, it has been known as a natural compound and functional food since past centuries.

All parts of pomegranate have different anticancer, anti-inflammatory, anti-atherogenic, anti-diabetes, hepato-protective, and antioxidant activity. (Katz et al., 2007; Lansky, 2007; Naz et al., 2007; Rout and Banerjee, 2007; Wang et al., 2010). Antioxidant activity of the pomegranate components has been investigated in recent years. Regarding the different activities of pomegranate extract, we maintain that it is a suitable multi-objective potential treatment for various diseases and pathologies.

It is hoped that this review will reveal some of the most invaluable points of exploring these plant herbs.