Artocarpus heterophyllus (jackfruit)

Importance
A. heterophyllus is a small to medium sized evergreen tree that reaches heights of up to 20 m (and rarely 30 m) and diameters of 80 200 cm. It has a straight, cylindrical, low branched trunk and a dense, irregular, spreading crown. It is native to the rain forests of the Western Ghats of India (Wester, 1916; Popenoe, 1920; Wester, 1921; Bailey, 1949; Dutta, 1956; Chandler, 1958; Ochse et al., 1961; Murthy, 1966; Rowe Dutton, 1976); it is now widely cultivated throughout the tropical lowlands <1000 m) (Bailey, 1949; Dutta, 1956; Ochse et al., 1961; Yap, 1972). The species is adapted to both open and shaded conditions. A disadvantage of the species is that it cannot tolerate poor drainage or drought. Although A. heterophyllus prefers a warm, humid climate, it is more tolerant of cooler and drier conditions than other species within the genus; mature trees have been known to tolerate mild drought and temperatures down to  3°C.A. heterophyllus is considered to be a multi purpose tree species, being valued for its fruits, timber and leaf fodder. It is used in reforestation programmes or as a tree component in agroforestry systems. It produces the largest of all cultivated fruits, with single fruits weighing up to 30 kg. It is an important fruit crop in India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and many other tropical regions, including Africa and America (Popenoe, 1920; Rowe Dutton, 1976). It is widely planted in Bangladesh as a reforestation species and as an agroforestry crop in many tropical countries (Hensleigh and Holaway, 1988; Murthy, 1966). A. heterophyllus also produces a good quality timber which is widely used in Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and India.
Summary of Invasiveness
The following summary is from Witt and Luke (2017):
Description
Medium sized evergreen tree [8–25 (–30) m tall]; stem straight, of diameter 30–80 (–200) cm, branching near the base, rarely buttressed; twigs sometimes covered with
minute hairs; crown dome shaped, sometimes pyramidal, dense; exudes a white gummy latex when damaged.
Origin
Bangladesh, India, Malaysia.
Reason for Introduction
Food, fodder, medicine, shade and ornament.
Invades
Roadsides, disturbed areas, urban open spaces, forest edges/gaps and secondary forest.
Impacts
Has the ability to form dense stands, to the detriment of native flora and fauna.
Description
Medium sized, evergreen, monoecious tree up to 20( 30) m tall and 80( 200) cm in diameter; all living parts exude viscid, white latex when injured. Bark rough to somewhat scaly, dark grey to greyish brown. Crown dense, conical in young and shaded trees, becoming rounded or spreading in the older tree. New shoots, twigs and leaves usually glabrous but occasionally short haired and scabrid. Stipules ovate acute, 1.5 8 x 0.5 3 cm, deciduous and leaving annular scars on the twigs. Leaves thin leathery, obovate elliptic to elliptic, 5 25 x 3.5 12 cm, broadest at or above the middle, base cuneate, margin entire or in young plants often with 1 2 pairs of lobes, apex rounded or blunt with short, pointed tip; dark green and shiny above, dull pale green underneath; petiole 1.5 4 cm long, shallowly grooved on the adaxial side, sparsely hairy. Inflorescences solitary, borne axillary on special lateral, short leafy shoots arising from older branches and main trunk; male flower heads barrel shaped or ellipsoid, 3 8 cm long and 1 3 cm across, composed of sterile and fertile flowers closely embedded on a central core (receptacle), dark green, stalk 1.5 3.5 cm long and 0.5 1 cm thick, bearing annular ring near the distal end; sterile male flowers with solid perianth; fertile male flowers with tubular, bilobed, 1 1.5 mm long perianth, stamen 1 2 mm long; female heads borne singly or in pairs distal to the position of male heads, cylindrical or oblong, dark green, 5 15 cm long, 3 4.5 cm across, with a distinct annulus at the top end of the stout stalk, subtended by a spathaceous, deciduous bract, 5 8 cm long; female flowers with tubular perianths which are fused at both ends and projecting as 3 7 angled, blunt or pointed, minute pyramidal protuberances topped by spathulate or ligulate styles and stigmas. Fruit (syncarp) barrel  or pear shaped, 30 100 x 25 50 cm, with short pyramidal protuberances or warts; stalk 5 10 cm long, 1 1.5 cm thick; rind ca 1 cm thick, together with the central core (receptacle) inseparable from the waxy, firm or soft, golden yellow, fleshy perianths surrounding the seeds. Seeds numerous, oblong ellipsoid, 2 4 x 1.5 2.5 cm, enclosed by horny endocarps and subgelatinous exocarps; testa thin and leathery; embryo with ventral radicle, cotyledons fleshy, unequal; endosperm very small or absent.
Notes on Pests
A host of diseases and pests has been reported, but few are specific to jackfruit, and crop protection is not a major concern for growers. However, bacterial dieback caused by Erwinia carotovora is causing increasing losses in jackfruit as well as chempedak. Initially, the bacteria affect the growing shoots, but the disease spreads downwards and eventually kills the tree. To control the disease, chemicals, including trunk injection with antibiotics, are being tested in Malaysia. A serious disease in Assam (India) is blossom rot, also called fruit rot or stem rot, caused by Rhizophus artocarpi, leading to crop losses estimated at 15 30%. The inflorescences or the tips of the flowering shoots are infected. The inflorescences are blackened by the sporangia; they rot and drop. Copper fungicides are effective, and control of ants which carry the spores should be considered. Leaf spots of various descriptions can often be found. Different fungi may be involved, including Colletotrichum lagenarium, Phomopsis artocarpina and Septoria artocarpi. The well known pink disease, Corticium salmonicolor, is a prominent disease of jackfruit. Thorough removal of affected parts is recommended so that the rainy season is entered with a low infection pressure.
Borers are the major pest. Caterpillars of Diaphania caesalis [Glyphodes caesalis], the shoot borer, tunnel into buds, young shoots and fruit. Removal of affected parts breaks the life cycle since the caterpillar pupates in the tunnel; fruit may be bagged for protection. Bark borers, caterpillars of Indarbela tetraonis and Batocera rufomaculata, can be controlled by fumigating the holes. The brown bud weevil, Ochyromera artocarpi, is a specific jackfruit pest. The grubs bore into tender buds and fruits and the adults feed on the leaves. Infected parts should be destroyed and insecticides may be needed. Swarms of spittle bugs, Cosmoscarta relata, feed on young leaves. The nymphs live together in a mass of secreted froth, which may be collected and destroyed. Maggots of fruit flies, Bactrocera dorsalis and B. umbrosus, may infest the fruit. To control the pest, the fruit is bagged, ripe and overripe fruit are not left around but buried deep in the ground, and bait sprays may be used. Other pests include numerous sucking insects such as mealybugs, aphids, white flies, thrips, etc. and also leaf webber caterpillars.
List of Pests
Major host of:
Anomala; Archips tabescens; Bactrocera kandiensis; Bactrocera umbrosa; Batocera rubus (rubber root borer); Batocera rufomaculata (mango tree borer); Colletotrichum orbiculare (anthracnose of cucurbits); Dysmicoccus neobrevipes (grey pineapple mealybug); Glyphodes caesalis (shoot borer of jackfruit); Icerya aegyptiaca (breadfruit mealybug); Indarbela dea (bark borer); Indarbela tetraonis (bark borer); Lepidiota bimaculata; Ochyromera artocarpi (brown bud weevil of jackfruit); Phomopsis artocarpina (leaf spot of jackfruit); Rhizopus artocarpi (blossom rot of jackfruit); Septoria artocarpi (leaf spot of jackfruit); Unaspis citri (citrus snow scale)
Minor host of:
Achatina fulica (giant African land snail); Aleurocanthus woglumi (citrus blackfly); Attacus atlas (atlas moth); Bactrocera carambolae (carambola fruit fly); Bactrocera cucurbitae (melon fly); Bactrocera dorsalis (Oriental fruit fly); Botryosphaeria stevensii (Botryosphaeria disease, grapevine); Cerataphis lataniae (palm aphid); Cosmoscarta relata (spittle bug); Dickeya fangzhongdai; Erythricium salmonicolor (pink disease); Eudocima fullonia (fruit piercing moth); Euwallacea piceus; Glomerella cingulata (anthracnose); Hemiberlesia lataniae (latania scale); Hemicriconemoides mangiferae; Homona coffearia (tea tortrix); Hypomeces squamosus (green weevil); Lasiodiplodia theobromae (diplodia pod rot of cocoa); Meloidogyne enterolobii (Pacara earpod tree root knot nematode); Pantoea stewartii (bacterial wilt of maize); Pinnaspis strachani (lesser snow scale); Rhizopus stolonifer (bulb rot); Rosellinia bunodes (black root rot); Rosellinia pepo (black root rot); Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (cottony soft rot); Selenaspidus articulatus (West Indian red scale); Thanatephorus cucumeris (many names, depending on host); Trilocha varians; Xyleborus perforans (island pinhole borer); Xyleborus volvulus
Wild host of:
Schistocerca gregaria (desert locust)
Host of (source data mining):
Adoretus sinicus (Chinese rose beetle); Aleurodicus dispersus (whitefly); Bactrocera albistrigata; Bactrocera frauenfeldi (mango fruit fly); Bactrocera tau; Bactrocera xanthodes (Pacific fruit fly); Cataenococcus hispidus (citrus mealybug*); Ceratocystis fimbriata (Ceratocystis blight); Drosophila (ferment flies); Icerya seychellarum (Seychelles scale); Kerria lacca (lac insect); Nipaecoccus viridis (spherical mealybug); Olenecamptus bilobus; Paracoccus marginatus (papaya mealybug); Phellinus noxius (brown tea root disease); Phytophthora palmivora (coconut budrot); Planococcus minor (passionvine mealybug); Rastrococcus iceryoides (mango mealy bug); Rastrococcus invadens (fruit tree mealybug); Thosea sinensis (assam nettle, grub); Zeuzera coffeae (coffee carpenter)