Importance of jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus L.) and its medicinal values: A review

Abstract
Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus L.) is regarded as "poor man's meal." It is mostly enjoyed by rural
people and is Bangladesh's national fruit. The primary goal of this study is to record the therapeutic value
of jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus L.). All components of the fruit and plant are utilised as human
food, animal feed, and furniture wood. Despite the fact that the jack fruit is the tree's major fruit, it is
utilised as furniture due to its lovely texture and colour. Antibacterial, anti-diabetic, anti-oxidant, antiinflammatory, and anti-helminthic characteristics are all found in jackfruit. Carbohydrates, minerals,
carboxylic acids, dietary fibre, vitamins, and minerals abound in this fruit. The seed is high in
manganese, magnesium, potassium, calcium, iron, and lectins, hence it satisfies human nutritional needs.
The purpose of this study was to examine the therapeutic value and health-promoting benefits of jackfruit
and seeds, with a focus on their use in food.
Introduction
The Moraceae family's jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.) thrives in tropical and
subtropical regions with warm and humid temperatures (Zhang et al., 2021) [57] Recently, it
was estimated that the world's jackfruit plantation acres and output exceeded 300,000 hectares
and 3.6 million tonnes of edible bulbs (Wu et al., 2013) [54]. Due to the flexibility of crop
planting and harvesting, jackfruit trees may be grown on poor soils and marginal lands, and
they are available all year. Jackfruit has become the fastest growing and most popular fruit tree
in tropical and subtropical countries due to its minimal environmental needs and labour
expenses (Swami, et al., 2012) [46]. Commercially farmed in Malaysia, Thailand, India,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, China, Australia, the Philippines, Florida (USA), Latin America, and
the Caribbean, jackfruit is one of the most important evergreen trees (Zhang et al., 2021) [57]. It
is a huge, evergreen tree that grows to be 10-15 metres tall and is native to evergreen woods at
altitudes of 450-1,200 metres. It is farmed across India's hotter regions. The stem of this plant
is straight and rough, with green or black bark that is 1.25cm thick and exudes milky latex.
The leaves are wide, obovate, elliptic, decurrent, glabrous, and the whole inflorescence is
solitary axillaries, cauliforous, and ramflours on short leafy branches. Female heads are oblong
oval receptacles, syncarpus, and cylindrics, while male heads are sessile or on short peduncles
receptacles, occasionally born on the final twing (P. Rowe-Dutton et al. 1985) [33]. In nature,
the seeds are separated by a horny endocarpus encircled by a sub-gelatinous exocarpus (1mm
thick) that is oblong ellipsoid. The 3–5 mm thick sweet yellow sheaths that surround the seeds
have a taste similar to pineapple, but gentler and less juicy (The Wealth of India et al. 1985).
The jackfruit tree (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam) yields more than any other tree species and
has the biggest edible fruit known (up to 35 kg). The jackfruit tree is useful in a variety of
ways. Ripe fruit flakes have a significant nutritional value, with 287-323 mg potassium, 30.0-
73.2 mg calcium, and 11-19 g carbs per 100 g. (C. E. Elevitch et al. 2006) [11]. Because it is
inexpensive and plentiful throughout the season, it is popularly referred to as "poor man's
meal" in Bangladesh. The nutritious seeds can be boiled or roasted and eaten like chestnuts, or
they can be ground into flour and baked into meals. The tree is also recognised for its strong,
anti-termite timber, which matures to an orange or reddish brown hue (E. T. Arung et al. 2006)
[17]. Cattle, pigs, and goats all benefit from the leaves and fruit waste. The dye produced from
jackfruit wood chips is used to give Buddhist monks' robes their renowned orange-red hue. In
addition, the bark, roots, leaves, and fruits of the plant all have therapeutic benefits (S.
Shyamalamma et al., 2008) [43]. It need a well-drained but wet soil with a pH of 4.3 to 8.0 and
modest soil fertility.The ideal temperature is from 19 to 290 degrees Celsius, with
a height of around 1600 metres above sea level and an annual
rainfall of between 1000 and 2400 millimetres (Roy et
al.,1996) [37]
. Furthermore, its output grows at a 15% annual
pace (Zhang et al., 2018) [26]. The economic value of jackfruit
has gradually risen as more areas have been planted. In
particular, it should be noted that jackfruit production in
Mexico has expanded by twofold in the last ten years, with an
output value of USD 3.7 million (SIAP, 2015). The studies of
jackfruit that are possibly beneficial are considerably less well
recognised and neglected as a crop.The fruit, tree, and
branches of the jackfruit provide several advantages. The fruit
is nutrient-dense and edible, with the ripe section of the fruit
being consumed and the green part being used as a vegetable.
The edible bulbs of mature jackfruit are normally consumed
fresh or processed into canned items; the seed weight
accounts for 10-15% of the overall fruit weight. People in
Asia utilise the plants for medicinal purposes, and they have
antibacterial, anti-diabetic, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-helmintic effects (A. U. Khan et al. 2021) [25]. 2
Megajoule energy per kg/wet weight of ripe perianth (about).
Furthermore, the fruit might provide at (S. B. Swami et al.
2018) [38]. Lignans, flavones, and saponins, which are found in
jackfruit, have anticancer, antiulcer, antihypertensive, and
antiaging activities (S. Palamthodi et al. 2021) .
Carbohydrates, minerals, carboxylic acids, dietary fibre,
vitamins, and minerals abound in this fruit. Manganese,
magnesium, potassium, calcium, iron, and lectins are
abundant in the seed, which provides the nutritional needs of
rural people. The jackfruit seed flour is not only a good
amount of protein, carbohydrates, and dietary fibres, but it's
also a good supply of nutrients for a low price. Antibacterial,
antifungal, and anticarcinogenic activities have been
discovered for lectin, a kind of glycoprotein present in
jackfruit seeds (A. N. M. Ramli et al. 2021) .
Juice, biscuits, chutney, jam, jelly, toffee, paste, leather, bar,
nectar, squash, and pickle are all made using ripe jackfruit
pulp, which is processed, dried, and marketed as a dry powder
(Y. Li et al. 2017) [55]. It's also available in syrup, either plain
or mixed with dried bulbs, chutney, preserves, candies,
concentrates, and powder. Consumer tastes have shifted to
diets that contain more natural antioxidants, dietary fibre,
natural colourants, minerals, vitamins, decreased calories, low
cholesterol and sugar, and are chemical-free, among other
things. The potential for using jackfruit waste, as well as byproducts of leaves and wood, to make biogas, briquettes, and
biochar (D. Nsubuga et al. 2020) [14].
The supply of nutrients has a direct impact on jackfruit
growth and development, and those nutrients increase the
nutritional quality of jackfruit (M. D. Toor 2021) [27]. The
high-quality jackfruit and some seeds are exported to the
United Kingdom (Al Riyadh et al. 2020) [56]. The jackfruit
tree is a cross-pollinated fruit tree that is mostly propagated
by seeds (C. Witherup et al. 2019) [13]. The tree can also be
used for a variety of other environmental purposes. The leaves
of the jackfruit tree are fed to cattle as a source of nutrition. 
Vitamins and minerals are abundant in the leaves, which are
beneficial to the animal. The stalks that remain are utilised to
make wood. The main stem, on the other hand, adds to the
house's elegance by serving as furnishings. It is conceivable to
profit from selling wood as wood, just as it is possible to
profit from selling well-shaped wood. However, selling
regular jackfruit fruits might bring in a lot of cash. However
the jackfruit trees that are grown around the village house are
neglected, and no fertiliser is provided. The purpose of this
study was to gather information regarding the nutritional and
therapeutic value of jackfruit in Bangladesh, taking into
account the aspects mentioned above.
Morphological characters of jackfruit tree
Jackfruit is an evergreen tree with a thick treetop and a
relatively short trunk. It grows to heights of 10 to 20 metres
(33 to 66 feet) with trunk diameters of 30 to 80 centimetres
(12 to 31 inches). In young trees, the canopy is normally
conical or pyramidal, but as the tree becomes older, the
canopy becomes more spread out and domed. It can generate
buttress roots on occasion. The jackfruit tree's bark is smooth
and reddish-brown. In the case that the bark is damaged, a
milky fluid is emitted. The leaf margins of immature trees are
irregularly lobed or divided. The tree provides a deep canopy
of shade. The beginning of heavy side branching is generally
near the ground. The tree's whole surface is coated in a sticky
white substance.
Flowers
Male and female inflorescences (or "spikes") grow on the
same tree in this monoecious plant. The blooms are tiny and
sit atop a rachis of flesh. Short, strong stems sprouting from
older branches and the trunk bear male and female spikes
individually. Male blooms are greenish in colour, and some
are infertile. Male spikes are positioned above female spikes
on younger stems. Male spikes are thick, fleshy, cylindrical to
club-shaped, and can reach a length of up to 10 cm (4 in).
Flowers are little and light green when young, darkening with
age. Male flowers are smaller and less hairy, with two 1 to 1.5
mm (364 to 1 16 in) membranes at the end of the perianth.
The stamens turn ash-gray when pollen is distributed. Female
flowers are bigger, elliptic or rounded, with a fleshy flowerlike base and a tubular calyx with hairy and tubular perianth.
An ovary with a large, capitate, or occasionally bilobed scar
can be found in female flowers. Insects and wind are said to
pollinate the blooms, with a high rate of crosspollination. The
flowering season lasts from December through February or
March (E. M. Gardner et al. 2018) .Fruits
On the trunk, branches, and twigs, inflorescences develop
(cauliflory). Jackfruit trees are monoecious, meaning they
produce both female and male flowers. The external skin of
the jackfruit fruit is comprised of hexagonal, bluntly conical
carpel apices that cover a thick, rubbery, white to yellowish
wall. The ellipsoidal to roundish fruit is a multiple fruit made
up of the ovaries of many flowers fused together. On the
trunk, the fruits grow on a long and robust stem. A central
fibrous core holds the hefty fruit together. They come in a
variety of sizes and ripen from yellowish-greenish to yellow,
then yellowish-brown at maturity. They have a sticky, rigid
shell. The huge, irregularly shaped fruit measures 30 to 100
cm (10 to 40 inches) in length and 15 to 50 cm (6 to 20
inches) in diameter, and can weigh up to 10 kg (22–55
pounds) (S. S. Rana et al. 2018) .
Leaves
Dark green, entire, simple, glossy, leathery, stiff, huge (up to
16 cm [6 in] in length), and elliptic to oval in shape, the
leaves are alternate, entire, simple, glossy, leathery, stiff, and 
elliptic to oval in shape. The leaves are arranged in a spiral
and alternate between each other. They are separated into a
petiole and a leaf blade, and are sticky and thick. The leaves
of elder trees have a smooth leaf edge and are rounded and
dark green. Petioles range in length from 2.5 to 7.5 cm (1 to 3
inches). The oblong to ovate-shaped leathery leaf blade is 20–
40 cm (7–15 inches) long and 7.5–18 cm (3–7 inches) broad.
When young and on young stems, leaves are generally
strongly lobed.
Seeds
Seeds are light brown, spherical, and 2–3 cm (0.8–1.2 in) long
by 1–1.5 cm (0.4–0.6 in) wide, with a thin, white membrane
around them. Each fruit may contain 100–500 seeds. Seeds
are tough and may be kept in cold, humid settings for up to a
month (E. M. Gardner et al. 2018) [16]. A thin, waxy,
parchment-like, readily detachable testa (husk) and a
brownish, membrane tegmen make up the seed coat. In most
cases, the cotyledons are uneven in size, and the endosperm is
absent. A typical fruit has 27% edible seed coat, 15% edible
seeds, 20% white pulp (undeveloped perianth, rags) and bark,
and 10% core (A. U. Khan. 2020).
Health benefits of jackfruit
Traditional remedies have been made from Artocarpus
species. Antibacterial, anti-diabetic, antioxidant, antiinflammatory, and anti-helminthic properties have been found
in the plants (U. B. Jagtap, et al. 2010) [51] Many minerals,
including N, P, K, Ca, Mg, S, Zn, Cu, and others, are
abundant in jackfruit (A. Gohain Barua et al. 2004) [2]. The
nutritional value of the meat, seeds, and meal of jackfruit. The
water content of the young, mature fruit and seeds,
respectively, was (51.0-94.4) g. The quantities of accessible
digestible carbohydrate in the young, ripe fruit and seeds were
(16.0-38.40) g and (16.0-38.40) g, respectively. Although
jackfruit seeds are underused and underappreciated, they
provide significant nutritional advantages and account for
10% to 15% of the fruit's weight (M. T. Hossain 2014) [32]
.
The meal's protein content was (0.40- 2.60) g in the young,
ripe fruit, and seeds of jackfruit, with the young fruit
contributing the most, while the fat content was (0.10-0.60) g
in the young, ripe fruit, and seeds, respectively. The fibre
content of the meal was (1.0- 2.60) g in the young, ripe fruit, 
and seeds of jackfruit, with the young fruit contributing more
fibre, and the mineral content was (0.87-0.90) g in the young,
ripe fruit, and seeds, respectively. The meal contains 20.60 g
sugar from ripe fruit. Calcium, magnesium, phosphorus,
potassium, salt, iron, vitamin A, thiamine, riboflavin, and
vitamin C are all found in jackfruit. When compared to meat,
jack seeds had a high total dietary fibre (TDF) content
(11.1%). (2.6%). The seeds of the jackfruit also contained 8%
resistant starch (undigestible starch).
It is high in carbs, minerals, and vitamin C. (Goswami et al.
2016) [12]. The average yearly net returns found larger than the
agriculture system, according to (Hasan et al. 2008) [29]. Alves
et al. (Alves et al. 2020) [22]. The fruit includes lignins,
flavones, and saponins, which have anti-cancer, anti-ulcer,
anti-hypertensive, and anti-aging qualities. It is high in carbs,
minerals, carboxylic acids, dietary fibre, and vitamins
including ascorbic acid and thiamine (S. B. Swami 2018) [38]
.
Potassium, calcium, and iron (A. Gohain Barua 2004) [2]
,
manganese and magnesium (A. Gohain Barua 2004) [2], and
manganese and magnesium (A. Gohain Baru et.at 2014).
Seeds include a variety of components. The seeds include
lectins such as jacalin and artocarpin, according to (A.
Mukprasirt 2004) [5]. Jacalin has been demonstrated to be
helpful in determining the immunological state of patients
who have been infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus (I. A. Ajayi, 2011) [21]. The microorganisms Escherichia
coli and Bacillus megaterium were discovered to be resistant
to seed nanoparticles (T. Theivasanthi, et al. 2011) [48]. It
contains anti-oxidant properties (A. K. Gupta et al. 2020) [3]
and serves as an anti-inflammatory, anti-malarial, and antihelminthic agent (K. Soumya et al. 2015) [24]. (A. Soeksmanto
et al. 2007) [7]. The leaves of the tree are widely used to treat
ulcers. Because of the presence of hypoglycemic and
hypolipidemic chemicals in its leaves, it has the ability to cure
diabetics (M. S. Baliga et al. 2011) [31]. Sapogenins,
cyclooctenone, cycloartenol, -sitosterol, and tannins are found
in the leaves and stems. When latex yield artosteron is
combined with vinegar, glandular swelling and snake bites
heal faster (A. Mandhare et al. 2020) [4]. (H.B. Long and
colleagues, 2015) [20]. The root extract has been described as a
treatment for asthma and skin disorders. The wood has
sedative properties, and it's said to help with abortion,
diarrhoea, and fever (A. W. Septama 2017) [9]. Tapeworm
infestation is treated using the fruits and roots (T. M. Nguyen
et al. 2005) [47]. Carbohydrates, complex B vitamins, and
minerals abound in this fruit (S. L. Jagadeesh et al. 2007) [40]
.
The freshly picked fruit is eaten. In immature fruit, it can be
processed into candies, sweets, frozen pulps, juices, and
vegetables. Its seed may be cooked or utilised in cooking to
create a variety of dishes. There are now research examining
the use of seed meal as an alternate carbohydrate source in
cookies, sweets, and bread. Moisture (6.7%), glucosides
(38.0%), lipids (0.7%), protein (1.7%), and cellulose (59.0%)
are all variable elements in jackfruit (S. L. Jagadeesh et al.
2007) [40]. (Bapat and Jagtap 2010) [50]. Ripe fruits are high in
nutritional content, with each 100 g containing 287-323 mg
potassium, 30.0-73.2 mg calcium, and 11-19 g carbs.
According to (Chowdhury et al. 1997) [18], the bark contains
betullic acid and cycloheterophyllin, a flavone colour
(C30H30O7). Lycopene is also found in the fruit pulp (B.
Setiawan et al. 2001) [10]
According to (De-Faria et al. 2009) [1], the fruit contains 18 
carotenoids, 14 of which were effectively isolated, identified, 
and measured. Sapogenins, cycloartenone, cycloartenol, -
sitosterol, and tannins with estrogenic action are found in the
leaves and stem. -sitosterol, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, and
cycloartenone are all found in the root (R. Uddin et al. 2021)
[35] The crude fibre (2.36%) in jackfruit seeds is a thin brown
spermoderm, however the flour's composition varies
depending on the seed's nature (F. Noor. 2014) [19]
.
Conclusion
The jackfruit is a fruit that may be used in a variety of ways.
It's delicious in a range of sweet and savoury meals, whether
fresh, cooked, ripe, or unripe. Due to its purported health
advantages, jackfruit consumption has increased in recent
years. The pulp and seeds of the jackfruit are high in various
high-value chemicals that may have health advantages.
Jackfruit is a very nutritious and appealing fruit crop due to its
diverse bioactive profile. According to the findings, all
nutrients, such as vitamins and minerals, contribute to
malnutrition in Bangladesh's rural areas.