Detailed Review on Pharmacological Profile of Artocarpus heterophyllus

artocarpus heterophyllus is a plant that belongs to
the family Moraceae. Jackfruit is generally grown in
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Burma, Philippines,
Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and Brazil being the tropics
countries. Jackfruits is a seasonal fruit easily available in
summer season. It is a large evergreen tree varies with 10-
30m tall, having long tap root and the crown is dense
making it the largest tree borne fruit in the world. Jackfruit
seeds are boiled and included in the diets which have 77%
starch content.1 The various parts of the plants have
different actions such as the fruit pulp and seeds are used
as cooling tonic, roots are used in diarrhoea, leaves are
used to increase lactation, the ash of the leaves are used
for treating wounds caused due to ulcer. The bark stem is
used in anaemia, asthma, dermatitis, and expectorant.2
Growth and Distribution
Artocarpus heterophyllus in early years it grows rapidly at
about 1.5 m/year in height, later when it reaches maturity
its growth become slow to about 0.5 m/year.5 The tree is
found to be native to the rainforest of Malaysia and
Southern part in Western Ghats of India. Jackfruit has been
intensively cultivated for generations in many parts of the
tropics region, particularly in the Southeast Asia. Today it
is a significant fruits of India, Myanmar, China, Sri Lanka,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and Philippines. Jackfruit has also been cultivated in many Pacific islands and is of
Particular importance in Fiji, where there is large
population of Indian descent.Size and form
Artocarpus heterophyllusis a medium-size, evergreen tree.
It typically attains a height of about 10-20 m and a stem
diameter of 30-80 cm. The tree has a long taproot with a
dense crown. The stem is rough and straight covered with
a green or black bark. All parts of the plants comprise a
whitish latex which is sticky in nature and it exudes out
when there is injury.8
Flowers
This species is bisexual where both male and female
structures are present on the same plant. Male flower
heads are swollen, elongated, 1–4 cm long and 1 cm wide,
which is covered with yellow pollen at maturity that is shed
rapidly. Female flower heads are oblong and look like the
male heads but without pollen. The stalks of the flower
heads are encircled by a small green ring (Figure 2).
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
Anti-inflammatory effect
The fruits contain artocarpesin that suppresses the
productivity of nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) which may provide a potential approach for antiinflammatory effect.16
Antioxidant effect
The phenylflavones such as cycloheterophyllin and
artonins A and B which are isolated from Artocarpus
heterophyllus has antioxidant properties against lipid
peroxidation.
Antifungal effect
The chitin-binding lectin present in the seeds denoted as
jackin inhibiting growth of Fuserium moniliforme and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Sexual behaviour
The roasted seeds of Artocarpus heterophyllus has
aphrodisiac activity.19
Immunomodulatory effect
Jacalin which is the major protein from seeds is found to
have application in isolation of human plasma
glycoproteins, the investigation of IgA-nephropathy, in
analysis of O-linked glycoproteins and detection of
tumours.20
Antidiabetic effect
The hot water extracts of Artocarpus heterophyllus leaves
is found to improved the glucose tolerance in diabetic
patients.21
Antibacterial effect
The crude extract of barks, stem and roots, stem and root
heart-wood, leaves, fruits and seeds with methanol exert
broad spectrum antibacterial activity.22
Anthelmintic effect
The seeds will be found to have nematicidal actions against
various types of nematodes.
