Tropical Plant Database - Plant Details

Jackfruit is a handsome tree that can grow up to 9-21 m (70 ft) tall, with evergreen, alternate, glossy and leathery leaves to 22.5 cm (9 in) in length. The tree is monoecious, meaning that male and female flowers appear on the same tree. Tiny male flowers are borne in oblong clusters, while the female flower clusters are rounded. The largest of all trees produces fruits that can reach 20-90 cm (3 ft) in length and weighing 4.5-20 or as much as 50 kg (110 lbs). All parts of the tree contain sticky, white latex. The fruit has a unique compound structure. The exterior of the fruit is green or yellow when ripe and composed of numerous hard, cone-like points attached to a thick and rubbery, pale yellow or whitish wall. The interior consists of large fully developed "bulbs" (called perianths) of yellow, banana-flavored flesh, massed among narrow ribbons of thin, tough undeveloped perianths and a central, pithy core. Each bulb encloses a smooth, oval, light-brown "seed" covered with a thin white membrane. The seed is thick, white and crisp within. One single fruit can have from 100 to 500 seeds inside. There is one other unique and peculiar aspect about the Jackfruit: when fully ripe, the unopened fruit emits a strong disagreeable odor, resembling that of decayed onions, while the pulp of the opened fruit smells of pineapple and banana! (Popenoe, Wilson. 1974. Manual of Tropical and Subtropical Fruits.) (Morton, Julia F. 1987. Fruits of Warm Climates.)
All parts of the plant have medicinal properties. The root is a remedy for skin diseases and asthma and the extract is taken in cases of fever and diarrhea. The ashes of the leaves, burned together with corn and coconut shells are used alone or mixed with coconut oil to heal ulcers. Mixed with vinegar, the latex promotes healing of abscesses, snakebite and glandular swellings. Heated leaves alone are placed on wounds and the bark is made into poultices. The seed starch is given to relieve biliousness and the roasted seeds are regarded as aphrodisiac. In Chinese medicine the pulp and seeds are considered tonic and nutritious. (Morton, Julia F. 1987. Fruits of Warm Climates.)
The wood is beautiful, resembling mahogany and changing with age from orange or yellow to brown or dark-red. It has many qualities: it is termite proof, fairly resistant to fungal and bacterial decay, which makes it superior to teak (its strength is 75 to 80% that of teak) for furniture, construction, turnery and musical instruments. In Bali and Macassar, palaces were built of Jackwood and the limited supply was once reserved for temples in Indochina. Roots of old trees are greatly prized for carving and picture framing. In Malabar, dried branches are used to produce fire in religious ceremonies. A rich yellow dye used for dyeing silk and the cotton robes of Buddhist priests is made from the wood chips boiled with alum. The bark is occasionally made into cordage or cloth. Jackwood is an important timber in Ceylon and India. Timber is also exported to Europe. In some regions, the Jackfruit is fed to cattle. The tree is planted in pastures so the animals can have access to the fallen fruits. The Jackfruit rind is considered a good stock food. Also, cattle and other livestock eat young leaves. In India, the leaves are used as food wrappers in cooking, and they are also fastened together for use as plates. The latex serves as birdlime, alone or mixed with Ficus sap and Macassar oil (from Schleichera trijuga). The heated latex is employed as a household cement for mending chinaware and earthenware, and to caulk boats and holes in buckets. (Morton, Julia F. 1987. Fruits of Warm Climates.) (Information for this species compiled and recorded by Camelia Cirnaru, NTBG Consultant.)