Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam) Biggest Fruit with High Nutritional and Pharmacological Values: A Review

Introduction
Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam)
largest tree born tropical fruit in the world
belongs to the family Moraceae. It is a
monoecious evergreen tree possibly
indigenous to the rain forests of the Western
Ghats in the Southwestern parts of India
(Baliga et al., 2011).) . It is used as staple
food in India and commonly known as
kanthal, kathal, kathar appears in market
during spring to summer. It is abundantly
grown in India, Bangladesh Malaysia,
Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines and Sri Lanka (Baliga et al., 2011), and in many parts
of Southeast Asia (Rahaman et al., 1999).
Jackfruit is the national fruit of Bangladesh
and Indonesia (Matin, 2015). The word
jackfruit comes from portguesa word jaca
which is derived from Malayalam word
chakka. Among the tropical fruits, Jackfruit is
an important underutilized fruit and often
called the poor man’s fruit commonly
consumed foods in India from the ancient
time by value addition of its fruits (Arora and
Parley 2016). Tender green fruit is used as a
vegetable and the juicy pulp of the ripe fruit is
eaten fresh as dessert and used in fruit salads 
(Samaddar, 1985). The seeds are eaten
cooked, roasted, or fried (Sreeletha et al.,
2018). In recent times jams, beverages,
candies, preserves, and dehydrated forms are
other industrial uses for the jackfruit (Nair et
al., 2013). Jackfruit is also used as a
traditional medicine for the treatment of
asthma, ulcers, wound healing, dermatitis,
cough, hypertension, nervousness, and
constipation (Abdul and Martin 2015). In the
different studies Anti-inflammatory,
antibacterial (Khan et al., 2003) antioxidant
(Ko et al., 1998) and anti-diabetic properties
(Fernado et al., 1991) of A. heterophyllus
were also reported. The phenolic types of
compounds were mainly reported as the
chemical constituent of Artocarpus species
(Hakim et al., 2006). It can slow down aging
and cell degeneration. Jackfruit can also
provide protein and carbohydrates for the
body, which will result in more strength for
the individual. Jackfruit contains more
protein, calcium, iron, vitamins and other
essential nutrients (Table 1) when compared
to the common fruits (Prem et al., 2015).Origin
The Jackfruit is originated from India; being
its natural habitat in the rain forest of Western
Ghats in the Southwestern part of India. Some
authors argue that Jackfruit native to the
rainforests of Malaysia. (Mowry et al., 1958).
Distribution
It is distributed in many parts of the tropics;
warm and moist regions (Bose, 1985)
particularly in Asia, Africa, and South
America (Abdul and Martin 2015). Haq
(2006) reported that nowadays, it is an
important crop of India, Burma, China, Sri
Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and the
Philippines. It has been introduced to many
Pacific islands since post European contact
and is of particular importance in Fiji, where there is a large population of Indian descent
(Prakash et al., 2009). The Jackfruit plant was
brought into Africa by Arabs and afterwards
into South America and has got acclimatized
in Mexico also. In India the jackfruit is
growing in the Jharkhand, Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh,
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Goa,
Maharashtra, Karnataka and other states in the
Eastern and Southern parts of the country
(Ranasinghe et al., 2019).
Botanical Description
The jackfruit scientifically known as
Artocarpus heterophyllus (Table 2) is close
relative of cempedak (Artocarpus
champeden), breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis)
and tarap (Artocarpus adoratissimus) which
belongs to the family moraceae (Haq 2006).
The word Artocarpus is a compilation of two
Greek words, artos, which means bread, and
karpos, which means fruit (Jones et al., 2013).
The species nickname of jackfruit,
heterophyllus, is a compilation of two Greek
words, hetero, meaning different, and phyllus,
which means leaf (Gupta 2011). This implies
existing variation in the shape and size of the
leaves. Jackfruit (Raihandhany et al., 2018)
The Tree
Jackfruit is a, handsome evergreen tree grows
in the tropics typically attains a height of, 10-
20 m and a stem diameter of 30–80 cm. It has
a relatively short trunk with heavy side
branching usually begins near the ground and
appears a very dense treetop. Stem of this
plant is straight rough whereas bark is green
or black, 1.25 cm thick. The canopy shape is
usually conical or pyramidal in young trees
and becomes spreading and domed in older
trees. All parts of the tree exude sticky white
latex when wounded. Leaves are Leathery,
elliptic to ovate stiff, large (upto 16 cm long)
in length alternate, entire, simple glossy deep green, often deeply lobed on young shoots of
juvenile (Burkill, 1997). Jackfruit timber is a
good wood for furniture, construction
material, and musical instruments since it
resists bacterial, fungal and termite attacks
(Orwa et al., 2001).
Flowers
This species is monoecious greenish flowers,
having male and female inflorescences in
separate flower heads. Female spike appears
on stout stems that sprout from older branches
and the trunk. Male spikes are found on
younger branches above female spikes. Male
spikes are dense, fleshy, cylindrical to club
shaped, and up to 10 cm (4 in) in length.
Flowers are tiny, pale green when young,
turning darker with age. Female flowers are
larger, elliptic or rounded, with a tubular
calyx. The flowers are reportedly pollinated
by insects and wind, with a high percentage of
crosspollination (Sharma 1964).
Fruits
Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam)
produces heavier yield than any other tree
species, and bear the largest known edible
fruit (up to 35 kg) The heavy
oblong-cylindrical fruit is borne primarily on
short stems from the trunk and interior part of
main branches is considered to be califlorous
The fruits are compound or multiple fruit
(syncarp) with a green to yellow brown
exterior rind that is composed of hexagonal,
bluntly conical carpel apices that cover a
thick, rubbery, whitish to yellowish wall.
They are typically 30–40 cm in length but
sometimes up to 90 cm with the diameter 13-
50 centimeters. Commonly jackfruit weighted
4.5–30 kg, although a weight of 50 kg has
been also reported (Matin 2015). They take
3–6 months to reach maturity. In the Northern
Hemisphere, main season for its maturing is
between March and September. A few fruits 
mature in winter. Jackfruit has a relatively
high productivity, 10-200 fruits about 25.71
t/ha. The compound fruit of jackfruit is made
of three parts viz., bulb, seeds and the rind i.e.
30-32, 18 and 50-55 percent respectively
(Srivastava et al., 2017). The ripe jackfruit is
sweet and has an exotic flavour considered
being delicious and nutritious fruit (Swami et
al., 2016) and it comprises carpel, seed
embedded in carpel and the skin, rind, sheath,
core and unfertilized floral parts or
undeveloped perianths.
Seeds
Jackfruit is composed of rind, edible bulbs of
yellow flesh and seeds. Seeds of jackfruit are
light brown to brown in color, rounded, 2–3
cm in length by 1–1.5 cm in diameter, and
enclosed in a thin, whitish membrane
(Menaka et al., 2011). Madruga et al., 2014
reported that well succulent, aromatic and
flavorful yellow sweet jackfruit bulbs
contains about 100 to 500 seeds, which
represent around 8 to 15% of the total fruit
weight. Most of the time, the seeds are left
untreated or discarded as wastes due to the
bland taste and texture of the seeds (Kooh et
al., 2016) however, are far less utilized with
occasional uses as dessert, minor ingredients
in culinary recipes or eaten as a snack after
boiling, steaming or roasting (Sy Mohamad et
al., 2019).
Value addition of Jackfruit Sharma et al., 2014 stated that Value addition
is the process of increasing the economic
value and consumer appeal of an agricultural
product by changing or transforming its
original state Various value-adding
technologies such as processing and
preservation techniques, dehydration and
drying technology, freezing technology,
packing, labeling, etc. can be applied to
agricultural produce to increase its value.. 
Jackfruit has great potential for value addition
for minimizing post-harvest loses and
enhancing the non-seasonal availability
(Satheeshan et al., 2019). The value added
products prepared from different parts of
jackfruit are presented in Table 3
Nutritional Value of the jackfruit
Jackfruit contain high amount of vitamins and
minerals (Table 2). The fruit is rich in
carotene and carbohydrates and moderately
rich in ascorbic acid (Hossain et al., 1979).
Jackfruit also contains minerals like calcium
and potassium and Vitamin B complex group
like thiamin, riboflavin, and Niacin and. The
seeds of jackfruit are reported to be more
nutritious than its bulb. Seeds are rich in protein, carbohydrate fat, potassium and with
fair amount of phosphorus and calcium
(Rahim and Quaddus, 2000). Jackfruits are a
good source of vitamin C. According to
United State of Agriculture Department report
(2016) Jackfruit has the unique nutritional
values (table 4)
Phytonutrients and their health benefit
The phytonutrients can prevent the formation
of cancer cells in the body, can lower blood
pressure, can fight against stomach ulcers,
and can slow down the degeneration of cells
that make the skin look young and vital
Sajesh et al., 2015. The phytonutrients present
in jackfruit are presented in Table 5.Carbohydrates
Jackfruit contains more carbohydrates and
sugars as it ripens Singh et al., 1991 reported
that jackfruit perianth and seed contains a
high percentage of starch. The starch and
dietary fiber content of the flesh increase with
the fruit maturity (Rahman et al.1999). Chrips
et al., (2008) find carbohydrate variation from
37.4% to 42.5% in different varieties of
jackfruit seed. Swami et al., 2012 reported
that low caloric content (94) in 100 g of
jackfruit.
Proteins
The pulp of ripe jackfruit contains 1.9 g
proteins per 100g.and many amino acids like
arginine, cystine, histidine, leucine, lysine,
methionine, threonine, and tryptophan
(Theivasanthi et al.,2011). The protein
concentration of the jackfruit seeds may vary
from 5.3 to 6.8% (Chrips et al., 2008).
According to Swami et al., (2012).The protein
content has ranged from 0.57 to 0.97% and
17.8–37% in the pulp and seed of different
varieties of jackfruit.
Fat
It contains no saturated fats or cholesterol
making it a healthy fruit. Artocarpus
heterophyllus is composed of more of the
saturated fatty acids with a total value of
65.25%. The low fatty acid content in
jackfruit is reported by Gunasena (1993)
estimated fat content of 0.1 – 0.4 % and
Sreeletha et al., (2018) also reported similar
fat content of 0.4 per cent.
Vitamins
Jackfruit is higher in Vitamin A, Vitamin E,
Vitamin B5 and Vitamin B6 and it is one of
the rare fruits which rich in vitamin- B
complex (Burkill, 1997) and contains very
good amounts of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), B3
(niacin), riboflavin and folic acid (Narsimhan,
1990) Jackfruit is rich in vitamin C (Swami et
al., 2012).Tiwari and Vidyarthi, (2015)
Evaluated that vitamin contents vary in
different maturity stages of jackfruit. Niacin,
known as vitamin B3, necessary for energy
metabolism, nerve function, and the synthesis
of certain hormones (Soobrattee et al.,2005).
Another heart-friendly property found in the
jackfruit is due to vitamin B6 that helps
reduce homocysteine levels in the blood thus
lowering the risk of heart disease (Fernando et
al., 1991).
Minearals
The ripen jackfruit contains minerals such as
calcium, magnesium (Tiwari and Vidyarthi,
2015) Samaddar, (1985) has recorded that
every 100g flakes of ripe jackfruits contains
287-323 mg, potassium, 30.0-73.2 mg
calcium. Sundarraj and Ranganathan (2017)
also reported that jackfruit have good amount
of minerals.
Pharmacological Activities
Jackfruit is a tropical tree, which has
numerous health benefits of jackfruit
including anti-carcinogenic, anti-microbial,
anti-fungal, anti-inflammatory, wound
healing, and hypoglycemic properties
(Sofowara, 1993). Jackfruit contains,
phytonutrients including lignins, isoflavones,
and saponins. These phytonutrients have
anticancer, antiulcer, and anti-aging
properties (Baliga et al., 2011). Sundarraj and
Rangnathan (2017) reported that alkaloids,
flavonoids, carbohydrates, proteins and
triterpenoids the active compounds presence
in jackfruit. The rich bioactive profile of
jackfruit makes it a highly nutritious and
desirable fruit crop. The different
pharmological activities are presented in
Table 6Future Prospect
Quality and quantity of food have become
important issue at the global level. Jackfruit is
grown mainly on homestead farms and it
produces multiple products for food, feed, and
industry. It is also contributing towards soil
management for sustainable environments.
Nowadays, number of scientific and
economic interest emerged to commercialized
and promoting jackfruit products. There are
high levels of vitamins and minerals have
been recorded in jackfruit. Being nutritionally
rich it can be good candidate to meet the
nutritional deficiency. However, it is
considered as an underutilized fruit in
commercial scale, mainly due to higher
percentage inedible portion which leads to
more waste generation, difficulty in peeling
and separation of edible bulbs from the rind,
lack of knowledge on proper postharvest
practices, and inadequate processing facilities
in regions where they are grown. There is a
great need of further research on enhancing its
shelf life and its commercialization and to
promote this fruit. However, it is considered
as an underutilized fruit in commercial scale
hence, adhering to correct post harvest
practices and conversion of jackfruit into
minimally processed products. Using
standardized jackfruit products offer
consumers a way of reaping the broad
spectrum of health benefit of this fruit.