Jackfruit: Uses, Benefits, Side Effects and More!

Introduction:
The jackfruit trees grow in abundance in countries like India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and other countries in Southeast Asia.1,2 The scientific name of Jackfruit is Artocarpus heterophyllus, and it belongs to the Moraceae family. It is a medium sized tree that can be grown in all seasons.2 The fruit is packed with numerous nutrients and vitamins, earning this giant fruit the title of superfood!
A jackfruit can weigh 3.5 kgs to 10 kgs on average and grow as big as 25kgs. The Jackfruit tree is a good source of wood for timber industries. Also, many parts of the jackfruit tree may be used in the preparation of medicines.2 Jackfruit is yellowish brown in colour, and its exterior is composed of hexagonal apices.1
jackfruit benefits
Nutritional Value of Jackfruit: 
Jackfruit is the source of many vitamins and nutrients, as given below.  
Properties of Jackfruit:
Jackfruit contains phytochemicals like carotenoids, phenolic compounds, flavonoids, tannins, and sterols. These phytochemicals may show many properties.1 Some of the properties of jackfruit are given below.
It may act as an antimicrobial agent
It may show antifungal properties
It may help with wound healing
It may show anti inflammatory properties
It may help lower blood glucose 1
It may show anticancer properties
It may help reduce blood pressure
It may show anti ulcer
It may show anti ageing properties2
It may show anti asthmatic activity
It may show antidiarrheal
It may help reduce fever
It may help induce sleep
It may help with digestion
It may help kill worms
Potential Uses   of Jackfruit:
The antioxidant benefits of Jackfruit play a vital role in improving health and relieving various medical conditions, as discussed below. The potential uses of jackfruit are given below.
Potential Uses   of Jackfruit for the heart:
High amounts of lipids in the blood are the leading cause of coronary heart disease. This is characterized by high levels of bad cholesterol and low levels of good cholesterol. Vitamin B6 in jackfruit may help lower the levels of homocysteine, reducing the risk of heart disease and stroke. High blood pressure can lead to stroke and other heart diseases.
The compounds in Jackfruit may help lower blood pressure and help manage heart disease and stroke. The high potassium content of Jackfruit may help reduce blood pressure that affects the blood vessels and heart. 2 However, if you are suffering from any heart conditions, you need to talk to your healthcare provider. Do not use herbs or vegetables as an alternative to regular medicinal treatment.
Potential Uses of Jackfruit for the skin:
Prolonged sun exposure harms human skin in multiple ways, such as sunburn, premature skin ageing, immune suppression, skin cancer and oxidative damage. Vitamin C is beneficial for the skin and is a potent antioxidant. Vitamin C in Jackfruit is vital for the skin as it may boost collagen production. Collagen is the protein that provides firmness, structure, and strength to the skin.
In addition, the antioxidant benefits of vitamin C may help combat oxidative stress from sun exposure. Jackfruit contains vitamin C in high amounts. It is a vitamin that is not produced inside our body, so we must obtain it from our diet, and jackfruit is a rich source of the same. 2 Also, if you are suffering from any skin conditions, you should reach out to your skin doctor for consultation. Avoid using any herb or vegetable without consulting with a doctor first.
Potential Uses of Jackfruit for the stomach:
A stomach ulcer or gastric ulcer is a type of peptic ulcer. An infection with bacteria called Helicobacter pylori causes stomach ulcers. Gastric ulcers result from continuous damage to the stomach lining due to such an infection or other causes. Jackfruits have been used traditionally to provide relief from gastric ulcers.2
With more human studies, we can identify how exactly jackfruit helps in managing gastric ulcers. However, until then, you are advised not to use jackfruit as a remedy for stomach ulcers without consulting your doctor first.   
Potential Uses of Jackfruit in digestion:
Jackfruit has a very high fibre content. High fibre has innumerable health benefits. It may help produce a smooth bowel movement and avoid problems like constipation. It may also help clear out cancer causing toxins from the large bowel and protect the colon mucus membrane.2 if you are suffering from digestive issues, you should consult your doctor.
Potential Uses of Jackfruit for the bones:
Jackfruit has high magnesium content. Magnesium may be suitable for bone health. This mineral is vital for calcium absorption and may help strengthen the bones. It may also help manage bone disorders like osteoporosis.2 However, more studies are required to support the use of jackfruit for bone health in humans. Therefore you are advised to avoid using jackfruit without consulting your doctor first.   
Other Potential Uses of Jackfruit:
Consumption of Jackfruit might show other potential uses as follows:
Jackfruit contains plenty of iron. Consumption of Jackfruit might help people having low iron diet and may help in regulating proper blood circulation.2
Consumption of Jackfruit might help maintain the health of the thyroid gland. Jackfruit contains a high amount of copper. Copper is essential for thyroid gland metabolism. It may have some effect on hormone production.2
Though studies are showing the benefits of the jackfruit in various conditions, these are insufficient and there is a need for further studies to establish the true extent of the benefits of the jackfruit on human health.
Also Read: Blueberries: Uses, Benefits, Side Effects, And More!
How to Use Jackfruit: 
The seeds as well as the fruits of Jackfruit are edible and delicious. There are several ways to use Jackfruit and enjoy it in your daily diet.  
Seeds  
The seeds can be added to cooked dishes. You can also use the seed flour in baking. 
Jackfruit seeds can also be boiled with sugar and eaten as candies. 
Fruit
Mature jackfruits can be added to salads and curries and cooked with other vegetables. 
Dried jackfruit pulp is used to make jackfruit chips. 
You can also eat ripe jackfruits in raw form or cook them in coconut milk to make dessert.2  
You must consult a qualified doctor before taking any herbal supplements. Do not discontinue or replace an ongoing treatment of modern medicine with an ayurvedic/herbal preparation without consulting a qualified doctor.
Side Effects of Jackfruit: 
There is no information on the side effects of Jackfruit. Different people may react to the same things differently. So, if you experience any side effects after consuming jackfruit, contact your healthcare provider immediately.
Also, avoid taking jackfruits against any health condition or for any properties without consulting with your doctor first. It’ll help you avoid unwanted side effects.
Also Read: Amla Juice: Uses, Benefits, Side Effects and More!
Precautions to Take with Jackfruit:  
Some of the precautions that you need to take while consuming jackfruits are
Pollen allergy
Avoid eating jackfruits if you have latex or birch pollen allergies. These allergies can have cross reactions with Jackfruit.
Chronic kidney disease
The high potassium content of Jackfruit can be harmful to people suffering from chronic kidney diseases or acute kidney failure. An excessive potassium diet can cause hyperkalaemia in such people. The build up of potassium in the blood is a condition called hyperkalaemia. It can lead to weakness, paralysis, and heart failure.5
Pregnant and nursing women should take Jackfruit with caution. Likewise, the elderly should consume Jackfruit in moderation.
If you are suffering from any disease condition, or suffer from specific allergies, consult your doctor about what foods and vegetables to avoid. Also, avoid consuming jackfruits for any health condition without consulting with a doctor first.
Interactions with Other Drugs: 
There is no information on the interaction of Jackfruit with other drugs. There is a lack of sufficient evidence regarding
There is no information on the interaction of Jackfruit with other drugs. Therefore, there is a lack of sufficient evidence regarding the safety of Jackfruit with drugs. You can ask your doctor or healthcare professional for advice.
Also, suppose you are taking any medications. In that case, you need to consult with your doctor about the possible interactions of the drug with any vegetables or herbs. This will help you avoid possible interactions of medicines with any herb or vegetable.
Also Read: Aloe Vera Juice: Uses, Benefits, Side Effects and More!
Frequently Asked Questions:
What are the health benefits of Jackfruit?
Jackfruit has many potential uses. Jackfruits may be helpful for the skin, heart, stomach, and bone health. It may also help maintain the health of the thyroid gland. In addition, a high amount of iron in jackfruits may provide high iron in food.2 But before you use jackfruit for the benefits, you need to consult with a doctor or healthcare provider. Avoid using any herb or vegetable against disease conditions without consulting your doctor.
What are the nutritional benefits of Jackfruit?
Jackfruit is packed with nutritional benefits. Jackfruit has nutrients like carbohydrates, protein, dietary fibre, and fats. It contains natural sugars like glucose, fructose, and sucrose. It also contains several vitamins and minerals. Vitamins like vitamin C, vitamin B6, riboflavin, and niacin.   Jackfruit contains minerals like sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, iron, zinc and phosphorous. All these vitamins and nutrients are beneficial for human health.3    
What are the benefits of Jackfruit for the skin?
Jackfruit has plenty of vitamin C. Vitamin C has many benefits for the skin. Vitamin C can help boost the production of collagen, a protein responsible for giving firmness, strength, and structure to the skin.2 However, if you are suffering from skin conditions, consultation with a skin doctor is necessary. Do not use jackfruit for any skin condition without talking to your skin doctor first.
What are the benefits of Jackfruit for weight loss?
Foods containing high fibre content can help you manage weight. A high fibre diet can keep you full for an extended period. High fibre foods also provide fewer calories. Jackfruit contains plenty of fibre, which might help you manage your weight.2,6 If you want to manage weight, make sure you meet a nutritionist or dietician before making any changes to your diet. Making any changes to your diet without contacting your healthcare provider is not advised.
What are the benefits of Jackfruit for diabetes?
Eating more fibre may help slow down glucose absorption from the intestine into the blood. This may help reduce the surge of insulin in the blood. Jackfruits are full of fibre and natural sugar (low calories) and may be suitable for diabetic people. The fibre may also reduce the rate of absorption of glucose into the blood.2,6 All these aspects of Jackfruit make it a fruit that may be enjoyed by persons with diabetes. However, jackfruit or any herbal remedy should not be used as an alternative to regular treatment. Make sure you follow doctor’s advice properly.

