Artocarpus heterophyllus (Jackfruit): An Overview 

ABSTRACT
Artocarpus heterophyllus (Syn. Kathal) belonging to family Moraceae is an integral part of common Indian diet and is freely available
in Indian and adjoining continents, its medicinal properties are also mentioned in Ayurveda. The plant is reported to possess
antibacterial, anti inflammatory, antidiabetic, antioxidant and immunomodulatory properties. Artocarpus heterophyllus is an
important source of compounds like morin, dihydromorin, cynomacurin, artocarpin, isoartocarpin, cyloartocarpin, artocarpesin,
oxydihydroartocarpesin, artocarpetin, norartocarpetin, cycloartinone, betulinic acid, artocarpanone and heterophylol which are
useful in fever, boils, wounds, skin diseases, convulsions, diuretic, constipation, ophthalmic disorders and snake bite etc.
KEY WORDS: Artocarpus heterophyllus, Moraceae, Phytochemistry, Pharmacological activities.
INTRODUCTION
The Artocarpus heterophyllus is a species of tree of the mulberry
family (Moraceae) is known by other names jackfruit (Eng.),
Kathal, Panas (Hindi), Kanthal (Beng.), Palaa (Tamil), Phanas
(Guj & Mar) & Chakka (Malayalam). It is native to Western
Ghats of India, Malaysia and also found in central and eastern
Africa, south eastern Asia, the Caribbean, Florida, Brazil,
Australia, Puerto Rico and many Pacific Islands (1). It is a
large, evergreen tree, 10 15m in height, indigenous to the
evergreen forests at altitude of 450 1,200m and cultivated
throughout the hotter parts of India. Stem of this plant is
straight rough whereas bark is green or black, 1.25cm thick,
exuding milky latex, leaves broad obovate, elliptic, decurrent,
glabrous, entire inflorescence solitary axillaries, cauliforous
and ramflours on short leafy shoots. Male head is sessile or on
short peduncles receptacles, sometimes born on the ultimate
twing, Female head are oblong ovoid receptacle, syncarpus,
cylindrics (2). Seeds are separated horny endocarpus enclosed
by sub gelatinous exocarpus (1mm thick) oblong ellipsoid in
nature. The sweet yellow sheaths around the seeds are about
3–5 mm thick and have a taste similar to that of pineapple, but
milder and less juicy
(3).
Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam) produces heavier yield
than any other tree species, and bear the largest known edible
fruit (up to 35 kg). The jackfruit tree has several uses. Flakes
of ripe fruits are high in nutritive value; every 100 g of ripe
flakes contains 287 323 mg potassium, 30.0 73.2 mg calcium
and 11 19 g carbohydrates (4). In Bangladesh, it is commonly
referred to as “poor man’s food” as it is cheap and plentiful
during the season. The nutritious seeds are boiled or roasted
and eaten like chestnuts, added to flour for baking, or cooked
in dishes. The tree is also known for its durable timber, which
ages to an orange or reddish brown color, with anti termite
properties (5). The leaves and fruit waste provide valuable
fodder for cattle, pigs and goats. Jackfruit wood chips yield a 
dye, which is used to give the famous orange red color to the
robes of Buddhist priests. In addition, many parts of the plant,
including the bark, roots, leaves and fruits have medicinal
properties (6).
It requires a soil which is well drained but moist, with a ph of
4.3 to 8.0 and with medium soil fertility. The optimum
temperature is 19 to 290C, altitude at approx. 1600 meters
above sea level and the annual rain fall between 1000 and 2400
mm (7).
Taxonomical classification (8)
Kingdom :Plantae   planta, plantes, plants, vegetal
Subkingdom :Tracheobionta    vascular plants
Division :Magnoliophyta    angiosperms, flowering
plants, phanérogames
Class :Magnoliopsida    dicots, dicotylédones,
dicotyledons
Subclass :Hamamelidae
Order :Urticales
Family :Moraceae    mulberries
Genus :Artocarpus – breadfruit
Species :Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.
Parts used:
Apart from whole plant, seeds, fruits, bark, root, leaves and
latex are also used.
Synonyms: (9)
Artocarpus brasiliensis Gomez., Artocarpus heterophylla Lam.,
Artocarpus maxima Blanco, Artocarpus philippinensis Lam.,
Polyphema jaca Lour., Soccus arboreus major Rumph., Artocarpus
integra (Thunb.), Artocarpus integrifolia L.f., Artocarpus integrifolius
auct., Artocarpus integer auct.
Ayurvedic Description
Sanskrit name :Panasa Synonyms: Atibrhatphala
Properties :Rasa: Madhura, kasaya (unripe
fruit); Guna: Snigdha, guru,
picchila;
Virya: Sita; Vipaka: MadhuraActions :Vatapittahara, kaphavardhaka,
balaya, sukraprada, tarpana,
durjara,
Seeds  Vrsya, baddhavitkara,
mutrala
Therapeutic uses :Klibata, durbalya, raktapitta, varna
Growth & Distribution
Artocarpus heterophyllus grows rapidly in early years, up to 1.5
m/yr (5 ft/yr) in height, slowing to about 0.5 m/yr (20 in/yr)
as the tree reaches maturity (10). Jackfruit has been cultivated
since prehistoric times and has naturalized itself in many parts
of the tropics, particularly in Southeast Asia, where it is today
an important crop of India, Myanmar, China, Sri Lanka,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and Philippines. It is also grown
in parts of Africa, Brazil, Surinam, Caribbean, Florida and
Australia. It has been introduced to many Pacific islands since
post European contact and is of particular importance in Fiji,
where there is a large population of Indian descent.
MORPHOLOGY
Size and form
Jackfruit is a medium size, evergreen tree that typically attains
a height of 8–25 m (26–82 ft) and a stem diameter of 30–80
cm (12–32 in). The canopy shape is usually conical or
pyramidal in young trees and becomes spreading and domed
in older trees. The tree casts a very dense shade. Heavy side
branching usually begins near the ground. All parts of the tree
exude sticky white latex when injured.
Flowers
This species is monoecious, having male and female inflorescences (or “spikes”) on the same tree. Male and female
spikes are borne separately on short, stout stems that sprout
from older branches and the trunk. Male spikes are found on
younger branches above female spikes. Male spikes are dense,
fleshy, cylindrical to club shaped, and up to 10 cm (4 in) in
length. Flowers are tiny, pale green when young, turning
darker with age. Female flowers are larger, elliptic or rounded,
with a tubular calyx. The flowers are reportedly pollinated by
insects and wind, with a high percentage of crosspollination.
Leaves
Leaves are dark green, alternate, entire, simple, glossy,
leathery, stiff, large (up to 16 cm [6 in] in length), and elliptic
to oval in form. Leaves are often deeply lobed when juvenile
and on young shoots.
Fruit
Jackfruit has a compound or multiple fruit (syncarp) with a
green to yellow brown exterior rind that is composed of
hexagonal, bluntly conical carpel apices that cover a thick,
rubbery, whitish to yellowish wall. The acid to sweetish (when
ripe) banana flavored flesh (aril) surrounds each seed. The
heavy fruit is held together by a central fibrous core. Fruits are
oblong cylindrical in shape, typically 30–40 cm (12–16 in) in
length.
Seeds
Seeds are light brown, rounded, 2–3 cm (0.8–1.2 in) in length
by 1–1.5 cm (0.4–0.6 in) in diameter, and enclosed in a thin,
whitish membrane. Up to 500 seeds can be found in eachfruit. Seeds are recalcitrant and can be stored up to a month in
cool, humid conditions (11).
PHYTOCHEMISTRY
The Artocarpus heterophyllus contains various chemical
constituents as several flavones colouring matters, morin,
dihydromorin, cynomacurin, artocarpin (Fig.2), isoartocarpin,
cyloartocarpin, artocarpesin, oxydihydroartocarpesin,
artocarpetin, norartocarpetin, cycloartinone and artocarpanone
(12). The heart wood on analysis yields moisture 6.7%,
glucosides 38.0%, lipids 0.7%, albumin 1.7% and cellulose
59.0 % (13). The plant also contains free suger (sucrose), fatty
acids, ellagic acid and some essential Amino acids like
Arginine, Cystine, Histidine, Leucine, Lysine, Metheonine,
Theonine, Tryptophan etc. (14). Bark from main trunk
contains betullic acid and two new flavone pigments,
cycloheterophyllin (C30H30O7) (15). Triterpenic compounds
like cycloartenyl acetate, cycloartenone are also reported (16).
Heterophylol (Fig.1) a phenolic compound with novel
skeleton was obtained from Artocarpus heterophyllus (17). There
is only 3.3% tannin in the bark, which is occasionally made
into cordage or cloth. The leaves and stem show the presence
of sapogenins, cycloartenone, cycloartenol (Fig.4),   sitosterol
(18) and tannins, they show estrogenic activity. A root
contains   sitosterol (Fig.7), ursolic acid, Betulinic acid (Fig.3)
and cycloartenone (19).
Jacalin, the major protein from the Artocarpus heterophyllus
seeds, is a tetrameric two chain lectin combining a heavy chain
of 133 amino acid residues with a light   chain of 20–21 amino
acid residues. It is highly specific for the O glycoside of the
disaccharide Thomsen–Friedenreich antigen (Gal 1–
3GalNAc), even in its sialylated form. This property has made
jacalin suitable for studying various O linked glycoproteins,
particularly human IgA1 (20). Jacalin's uniqueness in being
strongly mitogenic for human CD4+ T lymphocytes has made
it a useful tool for the evaluation of the immune status of
patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus HIV 1
(21). Two novel 2′, 4′, 6′ trioxygenated flavanones,
heteroflavanones A and B were isolated from the root bark of
Artocarpus heterophyllus. Their structures were elucidated as 5 
hydroxy 7,2′, 4′,6′ tetramethoxyflavanone and 8 (γ,γdimethylallyl)5 hydroxy 7,2′,4′,6′ tetramethoxyflavanone 
. Three phenolic compounds were characterized as
artocarpesin [ (5,7,2',4' tetrahydroxy 6 (3 methylbut 3 enyl)
flavone], norartocarpetin (5,7,2',4' tetrahydroxyflavone) and
oxyresveratrol (Fig.6) (trans 2,4,3',5' tetrahydroxystilbene) by
spectroscopic methods and through comparison with data
reported in the literatures (24). The anti inflammatory effects
of these isolated compounds were evaluated by determining
their inhibitory effects on the production of proinflammatory
mediators in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activated RAW 264.7
murine macrophage cells. These three compounds exhibited
potent anti inflammatory activity (25). The composition of
carotenoids of A.heterophyllus is carotenes  carotene,  
carotene,   zeacarotene, zeacarotene and   carotene 5, 6 
epoxide and a dicarboxylic carotenoid, crocetin were identified Traditional uses
The leaves are useful in fever, boils, wounds and skin diseases.
The young fruits are acrid, astringent, and carminative. The
ripe fruits are sweet, cooling, laxative, aphrodisiac and also
used as a brain tonic. The seeds are, diuretic, and constipating.
The wood is nervine, antidiabetic, sedative and is useful in
convulsions (27). The latex is useful in dysopia, ophthalmic
disorders and pharyngitis and also used as antibacterial agent
(28). The ash of Jackfruit leaves is used in case of ulcers. The
dried latex yields artostenone, convertible to artosterone, and a
compound with marked androgenic action. Mixed with
vinegar, the latex promotes healing of abscesses, snakebite and
glandular swellings (29). The root is a remedy for skin diseases
and asthma. An extract of the root is taken in cases of fever
and diarrhoea. The bark is made into poultices. Heated leaves
are placed on wounds. The wood has a sedative property and
its pith is said to be abortifacient. Latex is used as an antiinflammatory agent (30).
PHARMACOLOGY
Although a lot of pharmacological investigations have been
carried out based on the constituents present in it but a lot
more can still be explored and utilized in a therapeutic
manner. A summary of the findings of some of these studies is
presented below. Anti inflammatory Effect
Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam is a large evergreen tree cultivated
throughout Southeast Asia for its fruits. Its leaves and roots
have been used for medicinal purposes. The aim of this work
was to study the in vitro anti inflammatory effects of phenolic
compounds isolated from the ethyl acetate extracts of the
fruits of Artocarpus heterophyllus. Three phenolic compounds
were characterized as artocarpesin [5,7,2',4' tetrahydroxy 6 (3 
methylbut 3 enyl) flavone] (1), norartocarpetin (5,7,2',4' 
tetrahydroxyflavone) (2), and oxyresveratrol [ trans 2,4,3',5' 
tetrahydroxystilbene] ( 3) by spectroscopic methods and
through comparison with data reported in the literatures. The
anti inflammatory effects of the isolated compounds (1  3)
were evaluated by determining their inhibitory effects on the
production of proinflammatory mediators in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activated RAW 264.7 murine
macrophage cells. These three compounds exhibited potent
anti inflammatory activity. The results indicated that
artocarpesin (1) suppressed the LPS induced production of
nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2) through the
down regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX 2) protein expressions. Thus,
artocarpesin (1) may provide a potential therapeutic approach
for inflammation associated disorders (31). 
Antioxidant Effect
The antioxidant properties of prenylflavones, isolated from
Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam., were evaluated in this study.
Among them, artocarpine, artocarpetin, artocarpetin A, and
cycloheterophyllin diacetate and peracetate had no effect on
iron induced lipid peroxidation in rat brain homogenate. They
also did not scavenge the stable free radical 1, 1 diphenyl 2 
picrylhydrazyl. In contrast, cycloheterophyllin (Fig. 5) and
artonins A and B inhibited iron induced lipid peroxidation in
rat brain homogenate and scavenged 1, 1 diphenyl 2 
picrylhydrazyl. They also scavenged peroxyl radicals and
hydroxyl radicals that were generated by 2, 2' azobis (2 
amidinopropane) dihydrochloride and the Fe3+ ascorbateEDTA H2O2 system, respectively. However, they did not
inhibit xanthine oxidase activity or scavenge superoxide anion,
hydrogen peroxide, carbon radical, or peroxyl radicals derived
from 2,2' azobis(2,4 dimethylvaleronitrile) in hexane.
Moreover, cycloheterophyllin and artonins A and B inhibited
copper catalyzed oxidation of human low density lipoprotein,
as measured by fluorescence intensity, thiobarbituric acidreactive substance and conjugated diene formations and
electrophoretic mobility. It is concluded that
cycloheterophyllin and artonins A and B serve as powerful
antioxidants against lipid peroxidation when biomembranes
are exposed to oxygen radicals (32). 
