Plectranthus Amboinicus – A Natural Remedy for the Common Cold

Ayurveda, or ayurvedic medicine, is an approach to health that people in India have followed for more than 5,000 years. Ayurveda emphasizes good health,  prevention and treatment of illness through practices such as massage, meditation, yoga, and dietary habits that include the use of herbal remedies. Amongst those herbs is Plectranthus Amboinicus. It is known to have many potential health benefits including improved skin health, body detox, fighting cold and flu, easing arthritis pain, relieving stress, and improving digestion.

Plectranthus Amboinicus sliced for healthy tea - Cactus en ligne
What is Plectranthus Amboinicus
Plectranthus Amboinicus is also known as Mexican mint, Spanish thyme, Cuban oregano and Indian borage.  Although it is native to parts of southern and eastern Africa, the demand for this beneficial herb has caused cultivation to spread to other tropical areas around the world that can mimic its original growing conditions. The plant is very hardy and grows quickly. Requiring little water, it can even grow in colder conditions.

8 Potential Health Benefits of Plectranthus Amboinicus
1. May relieve respiratory issues
If you are suffering from flu-related symptoms like a sore throat, congestion, a stuffy nose, or congested sinuses you can chew on the Plectranthus leaves or brew tea from the leaves. The compounds contained in the herb may act as a powerful expectorant to eliminate mucus from your respiratory tracts and clear out your sinuses. This might also help to boost your immune system.

2. Can be used in skin care
From bug bites and stings to eczema and psoriasis, Plectranthus amboinicus possesses anti-inflammatory compounds that may quickly reduce redness and swelling, while maybe eliminating itchiness and irritation. Also, plectranthus oil might enhance skin regeneration and stimulates skin cell activity.

3. Has Omega-6 Content
The essential oils from the leaves of Plectranthus amboinicus contain an extract that includes omega-6 fatty acids, such as gamma-linolenic acid. This specific fatty acid has been linked to reducing arthritis pain by supporting joint regeneration.

4. Contains Vitamin C and A
The high content of ascorbic acid found in Plectranthus amboinicus make it effective as an immune system booster, while carotenoids and vitamin A content may help in improving vision, reduce oxidative stress in the eyes, and even possibly prevent macular degeneration.

5. May Reduce Stress and Anxiety
Some of the organic compounds and minerals may be mildly sedative in nature. In folk medicine, Plectranthus was used as an herbal remedy for those with high anxiety or chronic stress. It’s known to induce relaxation, peace of mind, and healthy, restful sleep. 

6. May Enhance Diuresis
Plectranthus amboinicus may act as an effective diuretic, which means that it can potentially rid the body of toxins by stimulating urination. This may also reduce the amount of excess salt, fat, and water in the body, keeping the kidneys and lymphatic system functioning smoothly.

7. May Help Relieve Fever
Plectranthus amboinicus is considered to be a sudorific, meaning that it may stimulate sweating. This can help clear out toxins through the skin and speed the recovery process.

8. May Help in Preventing Irritable Bowel Syndrome
In folk medicine, Plectranthus amboinicus was commonly used to settle upset stomachs and relieve irritable bowel syndrome. Brewing tea from the leaves of Plectranthus amboinicus is still considered an effective way to take advantage of this health benefit helps regulate digestion and sooth stomach inflammation

Watch the video below to see how Indian Borage, or Plectranthus amboinicus, is prepared in India as a healthy tea for soothing cold and cough symptoms.


Here’s a simple recipe for fighting the common cold and getting the health benefits of Plectranthus amboinicus:

Ingredients:

1 cup of water
1 tsb of tea powder
1 inch (2.5 cm) piece of raw ginger
4-5 Peppercorns
1tbsp of honey
3-4 chopped Plectranthus Amboinicus leaves
Steps:

Boil water
Crush peppercorns and add to boiling water
Add chopped Plectranthus Amboinicus leaves
Crush raw ginger and add to boiling water
Add tea powder to the boiling water mixture
Add honey to the boiling water mixture
Boil mixture for 5 minutes
Strain in a tea filter, drink and feel better soon!