Antimycobacterial Activity and Safety Profile Assessment of Alpinia galanga and Tinospora cordifolia

Tuberculosis  is one of the global health problems and leading causes of human morbidity and mortality [1, 2]. TB is recognized as one of the top 10 causes of death worldwide. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated 10.4 million people fell ill with TB in 2016 [3]. In 2016, there were an estimated 1.3 million TB deaths among HIV negative people and an additional 374 000 deaths among HIV positive people. Over 95% of TB deaths occur in low  and middle income countries [3]. Although the current treatment of TB with drug combination of isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide has a high success rate, drug resistant TB is a continuing threat [4, 5]. In 2016, there were 600 000 new cases with resistance to rifampicin (RRTB), the most effective first line drug, of which 490 000 had multidrug resistant TB (MDR TB) [3]. Consequently, the need to develop new novel tuberculosis drugs which are less toxic and more effective against resistant Mycobacterium strains is imperative. Natural products, either as pure isolated compounds or as extracts, represent a promising source of novel drugs for the treatment of various diseases including TB [5, 6]. Therefore, we were encouraged to investigate two well known medicinal plants, namely, Alpinia galanga and Tinospora cordifolia.
Alpinia galanga  Willd. (Zingiberaceae) known as Galangal, a member of the ginger family and native to Southern China and Thailand, is primarily used as a flavoring especially in the preparation of fresh Thai curry paste and Thai soup [7]. It is widely cultivated in Southeast Asian countries, e.g., China, Indonesia, Thailand, India, and Philippines [8]. Galangal exhibited different pharmacological activities such as antimicrobial, anti inflammatory, carminative, antipyretic, aphrodisiac, and emmenagogue and traditionally has been used for the treatment of various diseases such as kidney disorders, diabetes, cough, tuberculosis, bronchitis, rheumatism, asthma, and heart diseases [8–12].
Tinospora cordifolia  Miers which belongs to the family Menispermaceae is a climbing shrub widely distributed in tropical areas in South East Asia, e.g., India, China, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Philippines [13]. It is introduced in Saudi Arabia from Pakistan and grown as ornamental. In Indian colloquial, this plant is known as Giloya, meaning elixir of paradise, which kept celestial beings young and saved from aging [14]. The plant has significant medicinal importance and is widely used in the Indian folk medicine for increasing the lifespan, promoting intelligence, and improving memory and as antiaging agent [13–15]. Recent studies on T. cordifolia reported antioxidant, radical scavenging, hepatoprotective, anticancer, antiallergic, immunmodulatory, and anti inflammatory effects [16–21]. The current study was therefore designed to investigate the antimycobacterial activity of different extracts of Alpinia galanga and Tinospora cordifolia. Moreover, a safety profile assessment of both plants has been carried out through in vivo acute and chronic toxicity studies in animal model.
Plant Materials
The plant materials, namely, Alpinia galanga (roots and rhizomes) and Tinospora cordifolia (leaves and stems) were purchased from India, Dawa Khana Tibbiya College, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. The plants were authenticated by Professor S.H. Afaq, Department of Ilmul Advia, Ajmal Khan Tibbiya College, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. A voucher specimen for each plant was preserved in the lab for further documentation.
Extraction of the Plants
The air dried and powdered plant materials were defatted with petroleum ether. Then the plant materials were percolated separately with dichloromethane in 10 L percolator for one day. The process was repeated till the exhaustion of the plant materials. Then the obtained extracts were collected, combined, filtered, and evaporated using a rotary evaporators (Buchi® evaporator, Switzerland) at 40°C under vacuum. Then, the same extraction process was done for both plant materials using ethanol 96%. The extracts were then preserved at 4°C until testing.
Phytochemical Screening
Thin layer chromatography was developed for each plant's extract using different mixtures of organic solvents as mobile phases, visualized under UV (254 and 366 nm), and sprayed with various chemical reagents, e.g., anisaldehyde sulfuric acid for terpenoids, Dragendorff's reagent for alkaloids, Borntrager reagent for anthraquinones, etc. according to previously published methodology
Determination of the Antimycobacterial Activity
BD Bactec  MGIT 960 kit (Becton, Dickinson and Company, USA) was used for antimycobacterial susceptibility testing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The Bactec MGIT 960 kit was used with Bactec MGIT System.