ALPINIA

OVERVIEW
Alpinia is a plant related to ginger. The horizontal underground stem (rhizome) is used to make medicine.
Alpinia is used to treat fever, muscle spasms, intestinal gas, and swelling (inflammation); to kill bacteria; and as a stimulant.
How does it work?
Alpinia contains chemicals that block certain steps in the swelling (inflammation) pathway.
USES & EFFECTIVENESS
Insufficient Evidence to Rate Effectiveness for...
Bledding. Early research suggests that applying 4 mL of a specific product containing alpinia, licorice, thyme, stinging nettle, and common grape vine (Ankafer blood stopper) to the skin reduces bleeding during surgery but does not reduce time in surgery. Other early research suggests that applying the same product reduces bleeding after dental surgery.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS & WARNINGS
Pregnancy and breast feeding: Not enough is known about the use of alpinia during pregnancy and breast feeding. Stay on the safe side and avoid use.
INTERACTIONS
AntacidsInteraction Rating: Minor Be cautious with this combination.Talk with your health provider.
Antacids are used to decrease stomach acid. Alpinia may increase stomach acid. By increasing stomach acid, alpinia might decrease the effectiveness of antacids.
Some antacids include calcium carbonate (Tums, others), dihydroxyaluminum sodium carbonate (Rolaids, others), magaldrate (Riopan), magnesium sulfate (Bilagog), aluminum hydroxide (Amphojel), and others.
Medications that decrease stomach acid (H2 Blockers)Interaction Rating: Minor Be cautious with this combination.Talk with your health provider.
Alpinia might increase stomach acid. By increasing stomach acid, alpinia might decrease the effectiveness of some medications that decrease stomach acid, called H2 blockers.
Some medications that decrease stomach acid include cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac), nizatidine (Axid), and famotidine (Pepcid).
Medications that decrease stomach acid (Proton pump inhibitors)Interaction Rating: Minor Be cautious with this combination.Talk with your health provider.
Alpinia might increase stomach acid. By increasing stomach acid, alpinia might decrease the effectiveness of medications that are used to decrease stomach acid, called proton pump inhibitors.
Some medications that decrease stomach acid include omeprazole (Prilosec), lansoprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (Aciphex), pantoprazole (Protonix), and esomeprazole (Nexium).

