Alpinia galanga   Grand Galanga

Alpinia galanga is better known as Grand galanga, it is a large rhizomatous perennial commonly used in aromatherapy and Asian cuisine, for its aromatic rhizome. It is also a plant of easy culture and more rustic than one might think, which does not lack allure and offers a pleasantly scented flowering. A bit like a giant canna, it forms a tuft of large, long erect leaves larger than a man, from which emerge a few clusters of very fragrant pale yellow flowers, in summer or autumn depending on the climate. Despite its origins and its strongly tropical appearance, red ginger is able to survive short frosts of around  12°C, under a good protective mulch. Like many gingers, it appreciates partial shade, cool but supple and drained soil, and is grown in the ground as well as in containers.
Originally from Southeast Asia, more precisely from tropical Asia (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia...), Alpinia galanga is a rhizomatous perennial plant belonging to the Zingiberaceae family. The plant bears evocative names for French speakers such as Galanga from India, Ginger from Siam, Ginger from Laos, Thai ginger, Red ginger. Its vegetation, persistent in a suitable climate, is annual in the ground in our climates which are subject to frost. It usually emerges from the ground in April and disappears in the fall. At maturity, a clump of Alpinia galanga will measure approximately 1.80 m in height. The gnarled, fleshy, underground rhizome, reddish in color on the surface, has characteristic circular rings. Each year, it emits pseudo stems which are actually tight rolls of leaves, as in cannas or banana trees. The large rather thin but thick leaves form two rows. Their color is a fairly light green. The dense clump grows year after year. It flowers in summer or autumn depending on the climate, if the duration of our hot season is long enough to induce flowering. Inflorescences in terminal clusters protrude from the foliage, they bear numerous small fragrant, ivory white to pale yellow flowers.
Red ginger is ideal for giving a beautiful exotic and luxuriant touch to the garden, in a climate that is not too harsh. Planted in partial shade, in the company of Hedychium and Colocasia, the exotic effect will be guaranteed! It will also find its place in a very large pot on the terrace, to be stored in cold regions. This Alpinia, persistent in its native regions, is also an excellent veranda plant, decorative all year round. Its fragrant flowers are very popular in bouquets. Remember to install it in a semi shaded situation and in a soil that remains cool.
Properties: The essential oil contained in the rhizome is called "essence of Amali". Very fragrant, it is used in traditional Asian medicine and modern aromatherapy to treat many ailments.