Medicinal potentials of Alpinia galanga

A. galangal is useful against lumbago, rheumatic pains, sore  throat,  pain  in  the  chest,  diabetes,  tubercular glands, diseases of the  kidney, bronchitis and catarrhal affections  (Wighard  and  Gottfried,  1988).  It  is  mainly utilized in the treatment for digestion and a quick reliever of pain, especially angina, heart attack and gall bladder attacks  and effects as a  reliever  of heart pain (Grieve, 1971). Its effects on dyspepsia and as a digestive aid are elaborated.  In  addition  to  a  stimulant  and  carminative, especially  useful  in  flatulence,  dyspepsia, vomiting  and stomach  sickness  (Ciolino  and  Yeh,  1999).  Several recent studies with this flavonoid suggest that it may have a potent anti cancer effect, specifically through inhibition of the detoxification enzyme CYP1A1 and modulation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Quadri et al.,  2000). The implication with this type of research is that this flavonoid exerts  a  protective  effect  against  the  carcinogenic potential of overcooked, char grilled foods. Galangin has also  been  shown  to  be  a  potent  preserver  of  the endogenous free radical scavenger glutathione, thereby playing  another  anti carcinogenic  role  (Cipak  et  al., 2003). Recent  research  has  also  uncovered  several mechanisms  by which this particular  flavonoid exerts  a positive  effect  in  the  prevention  of  heart  disease. Galangin has a proven anti oxidative effect on endothelial tissues  and  acts  to  help  preserve  other  protective antioxidants  such  as  vitamins  E  and  C  and  other flavonoids, in this function it also serves to prevent  lipid peroxidation (Kaneko and Baba, 1999). Galangin  also  exerts  a  strong  inhibitory effect on the
cyclo oxygenase  family  of  enzymes;  this  provides  a strong  cardioprotective  effect  by  inhibiting  the aggregation of platelets, as well as providing a consistent systemic  anti inflammatory  effect  (Evans,  2002).  These are  only  a  few  of  the  known  applications  for  this incredible  flavonoid.  The  phytochemical  lists  this constituent  are  utilized  as  anti inflammatory,  anti mutagenic, anti oxidant, anti viral, cancer preventive and as  an  aromatase  inhibitor.  This  inhibitory  activity is  an aromatase inhibitor specifically to prevent the conversion of  testosterone  to  es
Pharmacological activity  The clinical study was conducted on Lozin (Herbal coded tablet) that contains different medicinal herbs including A. galanga, for treatment of tonsillitis and pharyngitis. Study was  conducted  in  Shifa  ul  Mulk  Memorial  Hospital, Hamdard  University,  Karachi.  The  selected  drug  was administered to attain a successful response to tonsillitis and pharyngitis. Clinical study of A. galanga shows that it exhibits  the anti bacterial effects. It was concluded that Lozin is remarkably effective for the treatment of tonsillitis and pharyngitis (Ejaz, 2011). 
Conclusion  A.  galanga  is  usually  used  as  carminative,  stomachic, stimulant,  expectorant,  aphrodisiac,  diuretic  and  anti spasmodic. It concludes that future research must aim at characterizing the active principle(s) responsible for each effect and determining if they act singly or synergistically with other principles present in the plant.