A Review of an Important Medicinal Plant: Alpinia galanga

Middle class people who live in rural or urban areas often
find it difficult to get modern health services, so they more
often use traditional medicines obtained from herbal
plants that grow around them. Treatment with herbs can
be an alternative treatment when modern treatments are
difficult to obtain [1, 2]. Treatment with herbal plants is
widely used in developing countries, especially in those
countries whose communities have a poor economy [3].
Herbal medicines are either organic or natural. Pure
herbal medicine is obtained from plant extracts that have
medicinal benefits, without a mixture of artificial
chemicals (synthetic) and without a mixture of animal
components. There is currently a rapidly increasing
demand for the use of medicines from herbal plants
throughout the world [4]. Africans and Asians use the most
herbs, followed by Australians and North Americans.
Around 100 million Europeans have started using herbal
plants as alternative medicines [5].
Alpinia galanga (Zingiberaceae), often referred to as
galangal, is one type of herbal plant that is widely grown in
Asia. Many developing countries cultivate this plant,
including Indonesia. This plant has a variety of benefits,
ranging from being used as a food flavoring to create a
distinctive aroma in cooking. This plant can also be used as
a treatment for various diseases [6].
Galangal is widely used to treat breathing diseases,
stomach diseases, diarrhea, and stomach cramps. Galangal
can also function as an antimicrobial replacement for
antibiotics [7, 8]. Galangal is also effective for treating
fever, abnormal menstruation, and to increase male
fertility [9]. Galangal rhizome began to be used in several
formulations to prevent cancer and tumors and is also
used for the treatment of other diseases such as
rheumatism, inflammation, diabetes, and neurological
disorders [10 14]. Galangal is a mixture that has begun tobe used by the community to overcome several chronic
diseases [15].
In the galangal rhizome, there are various compounds,
namely essential oils, flavonoids, phenolic acids, saponins,
and terpenoids [16, 17], while there are main active
compounds found in the galangal rhizome, namely
galangal acetate, kaempferol, and 1,8 cineole [14, 18 21].
Although the galangal rhizome is the most widely used and
studied part of the plant, the flowers on the galangal plant
can also provide additional benefits because they have
antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, although their
chemical composition is different from parts of the
galangal rhizome [22]. This study therefore aimed to
describe the traditional use of rizhome galangal, its
phytochemistry, its phytoconstituents, and its future
prospects for developing effective therapeutic
compounds.
PLANT DESCRIPTION
Alpinia galanga is a herb that can grow up to 3.5
centimeters, with underground rhizomes and minor
adventitious roots. The rhizomes have a red brown color
on the surface, while the inside of the rhizome is brown,
orange. They are 2.5–10 cm long with a pseudo stem that
is erect and covered with leaves. Size and shape of the
leaves are 3.8–11.5 cm, oblong lanceolate, glabrous,
distichous, and acute. Flowers are compound and 3–4 long
with a pleasant smell, with flower crowns green at the base
and white buds. The fruit is ellipsoidal and capsuleshaped, with a diameter of 1.5 cm, and colored orange to
red. Galangal has a 2n chromosome number of 48 [24].
There are species variations, and the plant is easy to grow
in countries that have appropriate agro ecological
conditions. There are pink galangal rhizomes and whitish yellow
galangal rhizomes. Pink galangal rhizomes have a
diameter of 8–10 cm, with a pseudo stem length of 3 m.
The yellowish white galangal rhizome has a smaller
diameter of 1–2 cm, and the length of the pseudo stem is
1–1.5 m. Alpinia galanga is easy to grow in various regions
of Indonesia, especially on the islands of Kalimantan and
Java . The morphology of galangal plants is shown in
Fig. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
Alpinia galanga grows in many Asian countries such as
India, Arabia, China, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia. It favours
hot places exposed to extensive sunlight, but it can also
grow in shrubs, forests, and open spaces [26]. In India,
galangal plants are exported to the Western Ghats and
Himalayan regions [27].
TRADITIONAL USE
The galangal rhizome is effectively used as a therapeutic
treatment for various diseases, because it contains antibacterial, anti fungal, anti inflammatory, anti hepatotoxic,
antioxidant, immunodulator, anti ulcerative, anti tumor,
and anti allergic activities [27]. It can be used to treat
stomach pain, back pain, rheumatism, asthma, diabetes,
heart disease, disorders of the liver, kidney disease, and to
increase the appetite [28]. Galangal rhizome can also be
used as a substitute for antibiotics, disinfectants, and food
seasonings [29]. Galangal seed can be used as a gastric
therapy and to treat cardiotonic lesions, and has diuretic,
antiplatelet, antifungal, and anti tumor activities [30]. The
tuber of the galangal plant is often used as a cough therapy
in young children with asthma, fever, dyspepsia,
bronchitis, diabetes mellitus, and irritations [31].
PHYTOCHEMISTRY OF GALANGAL
Alpinia galanga and Alpinia officinarum are the two
species of galangal plants that are the most common and
widely studied, because they have medicinal and
ethnobotanical properties [9]. Alpinia galanga has
pharmacological properties related to phytochemicals in
different types of galangal. Phytochemicals are
heterogeneous compounds that have a variety of
structures and a wide structural distribution. Judging from
the mechanism of metabolic biosynthesis, many
phytochemicals can be divided into three classes: terpene
compounds, phenolics, and alkaloids [32, 33].
Phytochemicals in the species Alpinia galanga mostly are
comprised of terpene and phenolic compounds. The
geographical distribution of Alpinia galanga dispersion is
also very influential on the distribution of terpenes and
phenolic compounds [32, 34].
PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS
Phenolic compounds are phenylpropanoids synthesized
from shikimate metabolism. These compounds are the
result of metabolites from the secondary metabolism of
galangal plants [35]. Phenolic compounds have a variety of
distributions, molecular weights, and complexities. All
phenolic compounds have one OH bound group with
aromatic arene (phenyl) rings [32]. Phenolic compounds
obtain the activity of phenolic hydroxyl groups from their
aromatic rings and are often regarded as weak acids.
These compounds can also be classified depending on the
amount and composition of carbon atoms in the molecules
and their chemical diversities [36]. Based on the
composition and number of carbon atoms, phenolic
compounds are classified into four groups: flavonoids, 