Alpinia: the gold mine of future therapeutics

Abstract
Since prehistoric era, plant-derived drugs were much preferred due to their less side effects than drugs of synthetic origin. Bioassay-guided selection of active fraction of a plant extract and further isolation and characterization of the pure bioactive compounds are in practice in both academic and industrial research. Zingiberaceae, a medicinally important, ornamental, monocotyledonous family has potential members in the tribe Alpinieae, among which the genus Alpinia is studied under this current review due to its wide range of biomedical applications. The members in the genus possess many bioactive compounds against harmful microbes to deadly diseases like cancer by regulating the different signalling pathway systems. Several compounds have been discovered and found to deliver diversified biological efficacy either in vitro or in vivo against a range of diseases. The chemical profiling of the genus and investigation of crude essential oils and individual bioactive compounds towards the therapeutic importance in various disciplines have been documented in the current review.
Introduction
Plant-derived drug research has become more promising in recent years and also a better alternative for synthetic medicine and therapeutics in spite of many challenges (Vanwyk and Wink 2009). The bioactive natural compounds isolated from various parts of a plant are the key research thrust for a chemist, biologist, pharmacist, and medical professionals to tease and tap the potential of the so-called the ‘wonder’ molecules. In spite of great technological advancement in the field of applied science, medical treatments are still in its infancy when the treatment against the deadly diseases like cancer is considered. In many cases, it has been found that treatment of such diseases with the chemosynthetic drugs shows frequent side effects, toxicity, severe mental and physical abnormalities, not acceptable to the patient and to their families. Hence, the conservative mode of medical treatments and synthetic drugs available ‘off the shelf’ appears to be a serious concern.
Nearly, 21,000 plants have been listed by the World Health Organization (WHO), which are in use for diverse medicinal purposes around the world. Being the largest producer of medicinal herbs, India is known as the botanical garden of the world catering to the needs for herbal medicines (Seth and Sharma 2004). The WHO report revealed that around 80 % of world population depends on the traditional medicines, largely on plant-derived drugs towards their healthcare, among which 30 % of currently used therapeutics are from natural resources alone. Owing to the increasing cultural acceptability and significantly lower side effects, nearly 75–80 % of the whole population in the developing countries mostly prefers the herbal treatment for primary health care (Ghasi et al. 2000).
Ethnopharmacogological knowledge towards the scientific investigation of medicinally important plants augments the prospects of alternative medicine and therapeutic values. The ethnomedical practices of the tribal communities of North East India were critically studied and documented for the Zingiberaceae family towards their future pharmacological diagnostics (Tushar et al. 2010). This important family is distributed worldwide with about 50 genera and 1,300 diverse species mainly concentrating in South and Southeast Asia (Wu and Larson 2000). In India, about 22 genera and 178 species have been reported from North Eastern and peninsular region (Jain and Prakash 1995), whereas North East region alone harbours 19 genera and close to about 88 diverse species (Prakash and Mehrotra 1995). Latin and species description in many cases are in doubtful identity.
The largest genus of the family Zingiberaceae, Alpinia, was classified by Charles Plumier, the famous French botanist and named after Prospero Alpino, the well-known Italian botanist of sixteenth century. The genus, Alpinia belongs to the flowering plants group (angiosperms); as per the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group II (APG II) system, it comes under the umbrella of monocotyledonous plants (Angiosperm Phylogeny Group 2003), belonging to the order Zingiberales, subfamily Alpinioideae and tribe Alpinieae. The genus includes 230–250 species distributed throughout tropical and subtropical climates of Asia and the Pacific. DNA-based studies showed the genus as polyphyletic represented by six clades scattered across the tribe Alpinieae (Kress et al. 2005).
Majority of the members of the genus produces attractive inflorescence, possesses aromatic aerial and underground parts generally subjected to different fractionation process for the extraction of essential oils, aqueous extract and bioactive components. Various parts of this plant have significant potential to yield bioactive components towards the development of future therapeutics (Fig. 1). The essential oil extracted from different parts of the plant contains diverse natural compounds having multiple medicinal properties. Because of its multipurpose utility, the genus Alpinia demands much attention from the researchers towards the development of potential therapeutics against various diseases like cancer, diabetes, ulcer and many neural disorders. Several research and reviews shows the importance and medical application of potential bioactive compounds isolated from different species of the genus and further research is continuing to unveil the mechanism of action of the natural bioactive compounds in regulating the disease progression and cure. The current aim of this study is to highlight the exhaustive pharmacological information and promising therapeutic uses of the genus Alpinia.
Isolation and characterization of natural bioactive compound (phyotochemistry
The members of the genus Alpinia have complex chemical profiles and possess diverse flavonoids and are being considered as chemosystematic markers for the key identification and order classification (Pugialli et al. 1993). The flavonoids, in general, are known to be responsible for yellow pigmentation in plant tissues, and are potential source of antioxidants, many of which have anticancerous activities due to the presence of functional keto (C=O) or aldehyde (–CHO) groups (Williams et al. 2004). The aqueous and organic solvent extract harbours many bioactive compounds and their natural derivatives which differ from species to species and also plant parts used (rhizomes, stems, leaves, flowers, seeds and fruits) for isolation (Table 1).
Therefore, before exploitation of these natural compounds for diverse biological activities, isolation and characterization for each of them need to be done primarily by different spectral and analytical techniques. The isolation, chemical and molecular characterization of natural compounds has been done by standard bioanalytical techniques like preparative thin layer chromatography (pTLC), column chromatography (CC), high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), ultraviolet (UV) spectral analysis, fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), 13C and 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectroscopy (MS). Till date, several bioactive compounds have been isolated and characterized from different species of the genus Alpinia. Some notable are enlisted in Table 1.


