Alpinia galanga

Alpinia galanga, or Lengkuas, is a large herbaceous plant that can grow up to 3.5 m in height. Its rhizome is a versatile ingredient used in Southeast Asian cuisine such as in lontong, rendang and spice mixes, imparting a zesty heat and complimentary note to other ingredients in recipes. The Lengkuas also produce fragrant and edible yellow-white flowers that are eaten as vegetable.
Growth Form	Large herbaceous plant up to 3.5 m tall.
Foliage	The glossy, nearly hairless leaves are oblong to lance-shaped (50 cm long, 9 cm wide).
Stems	The rhizome, or underground horizontal stem, is light red or light yellow and highly branched (2-4 cm wide).
Flowers	Fragrant, yellow-white flowers (3-4 cm long) occur in large clusters on a spike-like or racemose inflorescence (10-30 cm long, 5-7 cm wide).
Fruits	The fruit is a round or ellipsoid capsule (1-1.5 cm wide) which contains 2-3 seeds. It is initially orange-red to dark red, and turns black at maturity.
Cultivation	It grows best outdoors in moist, but well-drained, fertile soil. Apply compost as a mulch to help keep the roots moist and cool.
Ethnobotanical Uses	Edible Plant Parts (Edible Leaves, Edible Stems, Edible Flowers)
Food (Herb and Spice : The rhizome has a sharp, spicy flavor which is popular in Southeast Asian cuisine. It is finely blended with other spices to make a paste for dishes like laksa an curries. ;Fruit & Vegetable : The flowers are young shoots are steamed and consumed as a vegetable.)
Medicinal ( In Peninsular Malaysia, the seeds are used in traditional medicine to treat vomiting, herpes, colic and diarrhoea. The Filipinos prepare a leaf decoction to treat rheumatism. In Java, the pounded rhizome is applied to wounds and sores. The rhizomes are used in the traditional treatment of skin diseases, respiratory diseases, to promote digestion and appetite (stomachic) after childbirth, for intestinal problems and as an expectorant and aphrodisiac. An infusion of the leaves is taken as a postpartum medicine.)