A Review on Phytochemical and Pharmacological Potential of Alpinia galanga

INTRODUCTION
Medicines derived from plant sources are widely used
in traditional cultures globally and now a days they
are getting popular as natural alternatives to synthetic
chemicals. In the last few decades the use of herbal
medicine has increased exponentially. Recently it is
getting popular in developing and developed countries
owing to its natural origin and lesser side effects.
Alpinia galanga belongs to the family Zingiberaceae.
The plant bears underground stems called rhizomes
which have a strong aromatic smell with conspicuouslynodes and internodes.1
The seed of A. galanga is used
in emaciation and cleaning of the mouth, it stimulates
the digestive power and appetite. It is also used as a
purgative. Usually the rhizome is used as a spice and
a source of essential oil. Young shoots and flowers are
used as vegetable or as spice.2
The plant is broadly used
in dietary intake as well as in the traditional system of
medicine viz. Ayurveda, Unani, Chinese and Thai folk
medicine.3
Along with an aromatic ginger like odour,
it has a pungent hot and spicy taste. As the rhizome
has a characteristic fragrance as well as pungency, it is
widely used as a condiment for foods and local medi 
cine in China and Thailand.4
From the leaves, stems, rhizomes and roots of Alpinia
galanga, presence of essential oil is reported. Those are
mono and sesquiterpene as well as (E)   methyl cinnamate
in nature. They are responsible for the characteristic
odour as well as for the reported use in (folk) medi 
cine and in food products of A. galangal.5 Alpinia
galanga contained flavonoids and volatile oils.6,7 The
previous studies, the plant possessed many pharma 
cological activities, including antibacterial, antifungal,
antiviral, Antiprotozoal,8,9 immunomodulatory, anti 
oxidant effect, antidiabetic, antiplatelet, hypolipid 
emic and many other pharmacological effects. This
review is a combination of chemical constituents,
pharmacological and therapeutic effects of Alpinia
galanga based on various current studies.
METHODOLOGY
The study of the literature review was carried out
by searching on the electronic databases including
PubMed, Science Direct, Scopus and Google Scholar

for studies focusing on the biological and pharma 
cological activities of Alpinia galanga. All English 
language articles published between 1976 and 2017
were searched using the terms ‘Alpinia galanga’,
‘greater galangal’, ‘Thai galangal’. The list of refer 
ences of all the relevant articles was also studied to
include all reports and reviews related to the subject.
TAXONOMY
Alpinia galanga belongs to the Tribe Alpinieae
of Alpinioideae subfamily under the Zingibera­ceae family of Zingiberales order. Alpinia galanga is known by several
synonyms such as Amomum galangal, Alpinia viridiflora, Maranta
galangal, Languas galangal, Languasvulgare.2
It is known by sev 
eral common names such as Kulanjan in Hindi, Dhumarasmi in
Kannada, Kulingjan in Bengali, Kulinjan in Gujrati, Arattha in Malayalam,
Pera rattai in Tamil, Dhoomraasmi in Kannad, Pedda dhumpa in
Telugu, Mahabaracach, SugandhaVacha, Rasna in Sanskrit, Greater
galangal in English.
BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION
The plant is a perennial herb. It grows up to a height about 5 feet. Leaves
are oblong lanceolate, tuberous root, slightly aromatic. The rhizome
is from 3.5 7.5 cm in length, and seldom more than 2 cm thick. The
leaves are long, oblong lanceolate, acute, glabrous, ligules are short and
rounded. Flowers are greenish white in colour, bracteate, bracts are ovate
lanceolate. Tubular calyx, Corolla lobes oblong, claw green, blade white,
striated with red, rather more than 1 cm long, broadly elliptic, shortly
2 lobed at the apex, with a pair of subulate glands at the base of the apex,
with a pair of subulate glands at the base of the claw. Fruit the size of the
small cherry, orange red.10
TRADITIONAL USE
Alpinia galanga is an important medicinal plant in different traditional
systems of medicine to treat several diseases, including microbial infec 
tions, inflammations, rheumatic pains, chest pain, and dyspepsia, fever,
burning of the liver, kidney disease, tumours, diabetes and even HIV.12
The plant has an active role in the treatment of eczema, bronchitis,
coryza, mobile, pityriasis versicolor, otitis internal, gastritis, ulcers, and
cholera. The seed is used for emaciation and to clean the mouth. It stimu 
lates the digestive power, appetite and acts as a purgative. The rhizome
is generally used as a spice. It is also a good source of essential oil. The
flowers and young shoots are also used as a vegetable or as a spice.2