Alpinia - Uses, Side Effects, and More


CONDITIONS OF USE AND IMPORTANT INFORMATION: This information is meant to supplement, not replace advice from your doctor or healthcare provider and is not meant to cover all possible uses, precautions, interactions or adverse effects. This information may not fit your specific health circumstances. Never delay or disregard seeking professional medical advice from your doctor or other qualified health care provider because of something you have read on WebMD. You should always speak with your doctor or health care professional before you start, stop, or change any prescribed part of your health care plan or treatment and to determine what course of therapy is right for you.This copyrighted material is provided by Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Consumer Version. Information from this source is evidence-based and objective, and without commercial influence. For professional medical information on natural medicines, see Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Professional Version.
Minor Interaction
Be watchful with this combination
Antacids interacts with ALPINIA
Antacids are used to decrease stomach acid. Alpinia can increase stomach acid. Taking alpinia might decrease the effects of antacids.
Medications that decrease stomach acid (H2-Blockers) interacts with ALPINIA
H2-blockers are used to decrease stomach acid. Alpinia can increase stomach acid. Taking alpinia might decrease the effects of H2-blockers.
Some common H2-blockers include cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac), and famotidine (Pepcid).
Medications that decrease stomach acid (Proton pump inhibitors) interacts with ALPINIA
Proton pump inhibitors are used to decrease stomach acid. Alpinia can increase stomach acid. Taking alpinia might decrease the effects of proton pump inhibitors.
Some common proton pump inhibitors include omeprazole (Prilosec), lansoprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (Aciphex), pantoprazole (Protonix), and esomeprazole (Nexium).
Indomethacin (Tivorbex) interacts with ALPINIA
Alpinia might increase how quickly the body gets rid of indomethacin. This might decrease the effects of indomethacin.