16 Useful Guava Leaves Benefits For Your Hair, Skin, & Health

Even the leaves have numerous benefits, owing to their antioxidant and antibacterial effect.

Reviewed by Ritika Dass, MSc (Clinical Nutrition & Dietetics)
November 29, 2022 By Tanya Choudhary, ISSA Certified Specialist In Fitness & Nutrition
16 Useful Guava Leaves Benefits For Your Hair, Skin, & Health
Save
Many of us enjoy eating guavas and are aware of their many natural health benefits as well! However, have you ever wondered about the benefits of guava leaves? Yes, you got that right! More often than not, we just focus on the fruits and vegetables, and discard the leaves that come attached to them! Being aware of their benefits, if any, would help us make the most of them! Guava leaves, for instance, are replete with antioxidant, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory properties! Rich in polyphenols, tannins, flavonoids, carotenoids, and other therapeutic plant compounds, guava leaves might prove effective in relieving pain and symptoms of several health concerns! Their medicinal properties are so profound that we can now get guava leaf supplements as well! To know more about all the key ways you can benefit from guava leaves, read on!

Did You Know?
Extract of guava leaves was widely used in folk medicine to treat gastrointestinal and inflammatory conditions.
In This Article

Health Benefits of Guava Leaves
Guava Leaves Benefits For Skin
Guava Leaves Benefits For Hair
Infographic Excerpt: Amazing Benefits Of Guava Leaves
Frequently Asked Questions
Health Benefits of Guava Leaves
Guava leaves are regarded as herbal treatment for several diseases due to their medicinal properties. The health benefits of guava leaves are given below.

1. Aid in Weight Loss:
Person checking their weightSave
Shutterstock

Guava leaves aid in weight loss by preventing the complex starches from being converted into sugars. For this purpose, the carbs must be broken down in the liver for use by the body and guava leaves prevent the transition of carbohydrates to usable compounds.

2. Beneficial for Diabetics:
According to research, guava leaf tea can effectively lower blood glucose in diabetics (1). Moreover, it prevents the absorption of sucrose and maltose by the body, thereby lowering blood sugar levels. Drinking guava leaf tea for 12 weeks lowers the blood sugar levels without increasing insulin production.

3. Lower Cholesterol:
Research has proved that drinking guava leaf tea for 3 months can lead to reduction in LDL or bad cholesterol and triglycerides without any adverse effect on good cholesterol (2). Besides, the guava leaves are a great liver tonic.

4. Treatment of Diarrhea and Dysentery:
Guava leaves boiled in waterSave
Shutterstock

Guava leaves are herbal remedies for diarrhea and dysentery. According to an animal study, guava leaf extract has the potential for use in the treatment of infectious diarrhea (3). For treating diarrhea, boil 30 grams of guava leaves with a handful of rice flour in 1-2 glasses of water and drink this concoction twice a day. In case of dysentery, cut the roots and leaves of guava plant and boil them for 20 minutes at a temperature of 90 degrees Celsius. Strain the water and drink in moderation until relieved.

Related: 10 Natural Remedies For Diarrhea + Causes, Symptoms, And Prevention Tips
5. Aids in Digestion:
Guava leaves are widely employed for treating diarrhea and digestive ailments (4). Guava leaves may be particularly beneficial in case of food poisoning as well as soothing, vomiting and nausea. To relieve stomach ache, boil 8 pieces of guava leaves in 1.5 liters of water and drink thrice a day.

6. Treatment of Bronchitis:
Guava leaf tea is effective in treating bronchitis by opening up the lungs, loosening mucus and soothing coughs (5).

7. Treatment of Toothaches, Sore Throats and Gum Disease:
Guava leaf pasteSave
Shutterstock

Due to their anti-inflammatory qualities, fresh guava leaves can relieve toothache, heal gum and mouth sores and treat sore throats when used for gargling. According to a study, mouthrinse containing guava leaf extract had a profound effect on gingivitis (6). The antibacterial agent in these leaves protects the teeth and gums and therefore, guava leaves are used as an ingredient in toothpastes and mouth fresheners. Guava leaves can even be made into a natural paste at home for brushing the teeth and gums.

Related: Strep Throat Vs. Sore Throat: Differences, Causes & Treatment
8. Beneficial in Dengue Fever:
Guava leaves are considered a natural remedy for dengue fever. This is because guava leaf extract can increase the number of platelets in the blood and is not toxic at all (7). For this purpose 9 pieces of guava leaves should be boiled in 5 cups of water until 3 cups of water is left. After straining and cooling, a cup of this concoction should be given to the patient thrice a day.

9. Reduction of Allergies:
Guava leaves consist of anti-allergic properties (8). Moreover, the compounds found in guava leaves are effective in blocking all allergic reactions.

10. Sperm Production:
Guava leaf teaSave
Shutterstock

Consumption of guava leaf tea has proven to be effective in increasing sperm production, thus helping with conception (9).

11. Treatment of Wounds and Infections:
Guava leaves have great healing properties that can treat wounds such as cuts, impact abrasion etc. The antibacterial agents prevent infection and reduce inflammation of the uterus to accelerate the healing of wounds (10). Guava leaf tea may also help in curing ear infections as well.

Guava Leaves Benefits For Skin
When it comes to skincare, guava leaves can greatly help in improving your skin and treatment of various skin disorders. Following are the benefits of guava leaves for skin.

12. Treatment of Acne and Black spots:
Acne and black spots are quite annoying as they adversely affect the appearance of your skin. Guava leaves are effective in eliminating acne and black spots from the skin (11). They contain an antiseptic that can kill acne causing bacteria. For this purpose, mash some guava leaves and apply it on the acne and dark spots. Rinse with water after some time. This should be done daily until the skin is clear.

Related: 6 Home Remedies To Remove Dark Spots On Face | Causes & Types
13. Removal of Blackheads:
For the treatment of blackheads, blend the guava leaves with little water and use it as a scrub on your nose to remove blackheads.

StyleCraze Says
Boil the guava leaves in water to make the process easier and add a pinch of turmeric powder to the paste for additional benefits.
14. Anti-ageing Benefits:
Guava leaves contain antioxidants which destroy the free radicals that damage your skin (12). They protect your skin from aging and improve skin tone and texture. A decoction of mature guava leaves can be applied on the skin for tightening it.

15. Relieves Itching:
Skin itching can lead to serious problems if not treated immediately. Guava leaves are an instant treatment for getting rid of itchiness as they contain allergy blocking compounds (13).

Guava Leaves Benefits For Hair
Woman getting a head massage with guava leaf-infused waterSave
Shutterstock

Being rich in nutrients and antioxidants, guava leaves help in promoting healthy hair growth (14).

16. Natural Remedy for Hair Loss:
To stop hair loss, boil a handful of guava leaves in a liter of water for around 20 minutes. After cooling, apply it on your scalp and massage rigorously.

Related: 15 Effective Hair Masks To Treat Hair Loss
Infographic Excerpt: Amazing Benefits Of Guava Leaves
Guava is not only known for its taste but also for the health benefits it offers. But a lesser known fact is its leaves can also play a crucial role in promoting overall health.

Learn more about the benefits of guava leaves from the infographic below.

amazing benefits of guava leaves [infographic]Save
Illustration: StyleCraze Design Team

Guava leaves are rich in polyphenols and are packed with many therapeutic plant compounds. The benefits of guava leaves can be attributed to their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial properties. The medicinal properties of guava leaves may help treat many ailments. They may aid in weight loss, lower blood sugar and cholesterol levels, treat diarrhea, and improve digestion. In addition, they are effective in eliminating black spots, acne, and blackheads, and stopping hair loss. Hence, remember not to throw away guava leaves. Use their extracts or make tea with them to treat many illnesses.

Frequently Asked Questions
What are the side effects of drinking guava leaves?

Guava leaves can trigger stomach pain and temporary nausea in some people. However, these side effects subside after 1 or 2 days.

Can you drink guava leaves on an empty stomach?

Yes, guava leaves are safe to drink on an empty stomach. This drink can help you stay hydrated and manage diarrhea.

Should I drink guava leaves hot or cold?

Guava leaves can be infused in hot water and had on an empty stomach. If you find this drink does not suit you, you can cool it down by mixing it with ice cubes.

Can I mix guava leaves with ginger?

Yes, guava leaves can be mixed with ginger. This combination enhances fertility and helps in the absorption of nutrients.

