Biological activities and medicinal properties of neem (Azadirachta indica)

Abstract
Neem (Azadirachta indica A. Juss) is perhaps the most useful traditional medicinal plant in India. Each part of the neem tree has some medicinal property and is thus commercially exploitable. During the last five decades, apart from the chemistry of the neem compounds, considerable progress has been achieved regarding the biological activity and medicinal applications of neem. It is now considered as a valuable source of unique natural products for development of medicines against various diseases and also for the development of industrial products. This review gives a bird's eye view mainly on the biological activities of some of the neem compounds isolated, pharmacological actions of the neem extracts, clinical studies and plausible medicinal applications of neem along with their safety evaluation.
Journal Information
Current Science is a fortnightly journal published since 1932 by the Current Science Association, Bangalore (India) in collaboration with the Indian Academy of Sciences. The journal covers all branches of pure/applied science and technology such as physics, chemistry, life sciences, medicine, earth sciences, engineering and technology. Full length research articles and shorter research communications, review articles, scientific correspondence and commentaries, news and views, comments on recently published research papers, articles on universities and institutions, interviews with scientists, , book reviews, etc are published in the journal. Special Sections are also published on diverse and topical themes and this has served as a platform for scientific fraternity to get their work acknowledged and highlighted. The Editorial Board consists of experts from India and abroad in all scientific disciplines.
Publisher Information
CURRENT SCICENCE is published by the Current Science Association, Bangalore, in collaboration with Indian Academy of Sciences, Bangalore. The Association is registered as a Society in India under the Societies Registration Act. The main activity of the Association is publication of a fortnightly multidisciplinary journal.