What Is Neem Extract? Benefits, Uses, Risks, and Side Effects

What is neem?
Sometimes called “the village pharmacy,” neem is a unique medicinal plant in that all of its parts — including its leaves, flowers, seeds, fruit, roots, and bark — can be used (4Trusted Source, 5).
Centuries-old manuscripts reveal some of the historical applications of this tree. Its flowers were used to treat bile duct disorders, its leaves to treat ulcers, and its bark to treat brain illnesses (6Trusted Source).
Over 140 diverse active compounds have been isolated from various parts of the plant. These active compounds give neem its antioxidant, antimicrobial, antiparasitic, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, and wound-healing properties (4Trusted Source, 7Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).
Although the mechanisms by which neem works aren’t entirely clear, research into this plant is ongoing (5, 6Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).
Potential health benefits of neem
Although scientific research into neem is in its beginning stages, it shows promise for several aspects of health, including blood sugar management, as well as benefits for your hair, skin, teeth, liver, and kidneys.
Keep in mind that further human studies are necessary.
May promote hair health
Neem seed extract contains azadirachtin, an active compound that may fight parasites that affect hair and skin, such as lice. Azadirachtin works by disrupting parasite growth and interfering with reproduction and other cellular processes (9Trusted Source).
In a study that tested the efficacy of a neem-based shampoo on head lice in children, leaving shampoo in the hair for 10 minutes killed the lice while being gentle on the skin (10Trusted Source, 11Trusted Source).
Neem extract and nimbidin, a compound found in neem oil, may also treat dandruff due to its anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties. Dandruff and scalp irritation may result from fungal buildup on the scalp (8Trusted Source, 12Trusted Source).
May boost dental and oral health
Chewing neem bark to promote oral hygiene is a common practice in India (13Trusted Source).
Neem’s antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and immune-boosting properties may promote oral health. Although more research is needed, studies indicate that neem may relieve pain and help treat gingivitis, periodontitis, and tooth decay (3Trusted Source).
Furthermore, test-tube studies suggest that neem may minimize bacteria’s ability to colonize the surface of your teeth, thus reducing plaque formation (14Trusted Source).
Plus, in a 21-day study including 45 people with gingivitis, neem mouthwash was found to be as effective as chlorhexidine mouthwash — a heavy duty prescription mouthwash — at reducing gum bleeding and plaque (15Trusted Source).
May aid liver and kidney health
Neem’s antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties may help fight oxidative stress, which may in turn promote liver and kidney health.
Oxidative stress is caused by a buildup of unstable molecules called free radicals. Although your body naturally produces free radicals as a byproduct of metabolism, external sources increase their presence.
Some drugs, including cancer medication, painkillers, and antipsychotics, may contribute to oxidative stress, leading to tissue damage in your liver and kidneys (16Trusted Source).
Interestingly, one study on rats found that neem leaf extract reduced liver damage induced by high-dose acetaminophen (17Trusted Source).
Another rat study showed similar effects, suggesting that neem extract improved kidney tissue damage caused by chemotherapy medication (18Trusted Source).
However, studies in humans are needed.
May improve skin health
Neem seed oil is rich in fatty acids, including oleic, stearic, palmitic, and linoleic acids. Collectively, these fatty acids have been shown to have anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antimicrobial properties that promote healthy skin (19Trusted Source).
Keep in mind that while Ayurvedic medicine — an Indian traditional healing system — uses neem to treat psoriasis and eczema, very few scientific studies support these claims (20Trusted Source).
Acne
Historically, neem has been used to treat acne, reduce blemishes, and improve skin elasticity (21).
Indeed, studies suggest that neem oil’s antibacterial properties combat acne.
A test-tube study showed that neem oil may aid long-term acne treatment when added to solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), a new type of drug formulation that offers a stable release of active ingredients (21).
All the same, research in humans is necessary.
Ulcer and wound healing
Animal studies suggest that neem leaf extract accelerates wound healing through an increased inflammatory response and the formation of new blood vessels (8Trusted Source, 22Trusted Source).
In a 2013, 34-day case study, applying 100 mg of neem oil topically twice daily completely healed chronic skin ulcers (23Trusted Source).
In another study, 6 people with intestinal ulcers took 30 mg of neem extract orally twice daily. After 10 days, acid secretion had declined significantly, and after 10 weeks, the ulcers were almost completely healed (24Trusted Source).
Yet, this was a fairly small study. More human research is needed.
Other potential benefits
Neem may have several other health benefits, though results are mixed, and further studies in people are necessary.
Antimalarial effects
Neem contains active compounds called limonoids. A study in mice found that limonoids may be as effective at targeting malaria-infected cells as conventional treatments using chloroquine (2Trusted Source, 25Trusted Source).
However, some test-tube studies show no positive effect of neem extract on malaria outcomes (26Trusted Source).
Keep in mind that neem is not widely used to treat malaria at this time.
Antifertility treatment
Neem has also been considered as an alternative to a vasectomy due to its antifertility effects. A vasectomy is a surgical procedure that sterilizes people with testicles by stopping the release of sperm.
Animal studies note that neem may immobilize and kill sperm with no long-term consequences (2Trusted Source, 4Trusted Source, 27Trusted Source).
Diabetes management
Some animal studies indicate that neem leaf extract may be a candidate for new diabetes medications (4Trusted Source, 5, 8Trusted Source).
That’s because neem extract may help revive cells that produce insulin — the hormone that helps control blood sugar — and lower blood sugar levels (28Trusted Source).
All the same, human studies are lacking.
Neem’s risks and potential side effects
Although neem products are derived from natural sources, they’re not inherently safe for human use. Therefore, it’s important to take precautions when using neem products.
Neem seed extracts are comprised of various fatty acids and about 2% bitters, which are considered toxic. Levels of these bitters differ between products and may be influenced by extraction and storage methods (29Trusted Source).
Avoid oral intake
You should treat oral intake of any neem product with extreme caution, if not avoid it altogether.
In some cases, infants have experienced severe poisoning after being given neem oil at doses of 0.18–1.06 ounces (5–30 mL) (30Trusted Source, 31Trusted Source).
Similarly, one man experienced neurological and psychotic symptoms after consuming 2.1 ounces (60 mL) of neem oil (23Trusted Source).
Although one animal study showed no evidence of toxicity at levels as high as 2.27 grams of neem per pound (5 grams per kg) of body weight, these results may not translate to the same effect in humans (2Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).
Furthermore, anecdotal evidence links excessive neem leaf tea intake to kidney failure (2Trusted Source).
Other applications
People taking diabetes medications should consult their doctor before using neem to avoid the risk of very low blood sugar levels (5).
While topical use appears to be safe if diluted with other ingredients, direct application to the skin isn’t advised, as it may result in irritation (32Trusted Source).
Neem has been shown to have long-term contraceptive effects in men after a single dose. Due to its ability to halt sperm development and the limited research into its safety, you should avoid neem if you’re trying to have children (27Trusted Source).
Infants, children, and pregnant or nursing people are discouraged from using neem because of its mixed safety record and lack of comprehensive research.
How to find neem products and use them safely
Neem is commonly sold in oil, extract, powder, and supplement forms, as well as added to hair, skin, and oral care products. You can usually find these products at health and beauty outlets.
Neem oil can be applied to the skin or mixed with shampoo or creams. It’s considered safe for oral intake when diluted with alcohol or taken in tablet or powder form.
However, regulation of neem is limited, so many products aren’t tested for safety or purity.
While its topical application is mostly regarded as safe, extraction techniques and specific uses may affect its overall toxicity (5).
Read the label and follow the directions listed, as these vary from product to product.
It’s important to note that no standard dosage exists, and information on its effectiveness is unknown. To minimize health risks, avoid self-medicating and consult a healthcare professional before using any neem product.