Larvicidal activity of neem oil (Azadirachta indica) formulation against mosquitoes

Background
Mosquitoes transmit serious human diseases, causing millions of deaths every year. Use of synthetic insecticides to control vector mosquitoes has caused physiological resistance and adverse environmental effects in addition to high operational cost. Insecticides of botanical origin have been reported as useful for control of mosquitoes. Azadirachta indica (Meliaceae) and its derived products have shown a variety of insecticidal properties. The present paper discusses the larvicidal activity of neem based biopesticide for the control of mosquitoes.
Methods
Larvicidal efficacy of an emulsified concentrate of neem oil formulation (neem oil with polyoxyethylene ether, sorbitan dioleate and epichlorohydrin) developed by BMR & Company, Pune, India, was evaluated against late 3rd and early 4th instar larvae of different genera of mosquitoes. The larvae were exposed to different concentrations (0.5–5.0 ppm) of the formulation along with untreated control. Larvicidal activity of the formulation was also evaluated in field against Anopheles, Culex, and Aedes mosquitoes. The formulation was diluted with equal volumevolumes of water and applied @ 140 mg a.i./m2 to different mosquito breeding sites with the help of pre calibrated knapsack sprayer. Larval density was determined at pre and post application of the formulation using a standard dipper.
Results
Median lethal concentration (LC50) of the formulation against Anopheles stephensi, Culex quinquefasciatus and Aedes aegypti was found to be 1.6, 1.8 and 1.7 ppm respectively. LC50 values of the formulation stored at 26°C, 40°C and 45°C for 48 hours against Ae. aegypti were 1.7, 1.7, 1.8 ppm while LC90 values were 3.7, 3.7 and 3.8 ppm respectively. Further no significant difference in LC50 and LC90 values of the formulation was observed against Ae. aegypti during 18 months storage period at room temperature. An application of the formulation at the rate of 140 mg a.i./m2 in different breeding sites under natural field conditions provided 98.1% reduction of Anopheles larvae on day 1; thereafter 100% reductionwas recorded up to week 1 and more than 80% reduction up to week 3, while percent reduction against Culex larvae was 95.5% on day 1, and thereafter 80% reduction was achieved up to week 3. The formulation also showed 95.1% and, 99.7% reduction of Aedes larvae on day 1 and day 2 respectively; thereafter 100% larval control was observed up to day 7.
Conclusion
The neem oil formulation was found effective in controlling mosquito larvae in different breeding sites under natural field conditions. As neem trees are widely distributed in India, their formulations may prove to be an effective and eco friendly larvicide, which could be used as an alternative for malaria control.
Background
Mosquitoes transmit serious human diseases like malaria, filariasis, Japanese encephalitis, dengue haemorrhagic fever and yellow fever causing millions of deaths every year [1]. Extensive use of chemical insecticides for control of vector borne diseases has created problems related to physiological resistance to vectors, adverse environmental effects, high operational cost and community acceptance [2]. Numerous plant products have been reported either as insecticides for killing larvae or adult mosquitoes or as repellents for mosquito biting and are one of the best alternatives for mosquito control [2, 3].
Neem trees, (Azadirachta indica) native of India, belonging to family Meliaceae are fast growing evergreen trees ranging in height from 12 – 24 m. They are widespread in tropical and subtropical regions of the world, including semi arid and wet  tropical regions [4]. Neem seeds contain approximately 99 biologically active compounds of which azadirachtin, nimbin, nimbidin and nimbolides are major molecules. Many of these derived products have antifeedancy, ovicidal activity, fecundity suppression besides insect growth regulation andrepellency against insects [5–10]. Neem products have low toxicity to birds, fish and mammals and are less likely to induce resistance due to their multiple mode of action on insects. In addition to this, insect growth regulatory activity of neem weakens the cuticle defence system of the larvae causing easy penetration of pathogenic organisms into insect system. Azadirachtin, a biologically active compound has been promoted as a new insecticide that is considered more eco  friendly than synthetic insecticides. The pesticidal efficacy, environmental safety and public acceptability of neem and its products for control of crop pests has led to its adoption into various mosquito control programmes [8, 11].
The present study was aimed to determine the larvicidal potential of the emulsified neem oil formulation against different mosquito genera under natural field conditions in India.
Methods
Neem oil formulation
The test formulation was an emulsified concentrate containing 0.15% w/v azadirachtin, polyoxyethylene ether (emulsifier), sorbitan dioleate (surfactant) and epichlorohydrin (used as a stabiliser to protect the degradation of the formulation under exposure to sun light.), developed by BMR & Company, Pune, India was evaluated against late 3rd and early 4th instar larvae of different genera of mosquitoes.
Larvicidal bioassay
Larvicidal bioassay of the formulation was performed on late 3rd and early 4th instar larvae of Anopheles stephensi, a primary vector of urban malaria,Culex quinquefasciatus a common vector of filariasis, and Aedes aegypti a common vector of dengue, dengue haemorrhagic fever and yellow fever. The larvae were obtained from laboratory established colony as described earlier [12]. Twenty five larvae were released into 500 ml glass beakers containing 250 ml distilled water. The larvae were provided a mixture of dog biscuit and yeast powder in a 3:2 ratio as nutrients and supplemented with different concentrations (0.5 to 5.0 ppm) of the formulation. The experiments were carried out at 26°C ± 2°C. Five replicates of each concentration were run under the same microclimatic conditions along with untreated control.Mortality of larvae was monitored at 24 hours. The percent corrected mortality was calculated using Abbott's formula [13] and Log probit analysis was used to determine the median lethal concentration (LC50)/90% lethal concentration (LC90) of the formulation.
Stability test
Larvicidal bioassay of the neem oil based formulation stored at 26°C, 40°C and 45°C for 48 hrs was evaluated against Ae. aegypti at different concentration (0.5–5.0 ppm) as per the method reported above. Five replicates of each concentration were run under the same microclimatic conditions along with untreated control. A total of 100 larvae of Ae. aegypti were exposed against each concentration. Further bioassay test of the neem oil formulation of different concentrations (0.5–5.0 ppm) stored at room temperature (26°C ± 2°C) was evaluated against Ae. aegypti larvae at three months interval period for 18 months. Three replicates of each concentration were carried out along with control.
Field evaluation of larvicidal activity
Field evaluation of larvicidal activity of the neem oil formulation was carried out in two districts of Uttar Pradesh viz. Mathura and Kanpur and district Hardwar of the state of Uttarakhand. Initially a survey was carried out to ascertain the suitability of different breedinghabitats of target species for the trial. Larvicidal efficacy was carried out against late 3rd and early 4th instar larvae of different genera of mosquitoes under natural field conditions.
Larval density was determined using standard dipper (300 ml capacity with 9 cm diameter) method. Treatment dose (140 mg a.i./m2) of the formulation was determined on the basis of the results of laboratory evaluation carried out against Cx. quinquefasciatus and Ae. aegypti [14]. Five liters of the neem oil formulation was mixed with equal volume of water to make a uniform suspension and applied to 53 m2 surface area of breeding habitats through precalibrated knapsack sprayer.
Larval density/dip was recorded a day before application for both experimental and control habitats, thereafter observations were recorded at 24, 48 and 72 hr of post application. Further observations were made at weekly intervals for 3 weeks. Percent reduction was calculated for 3rd & 4th instar larvae and pupae using the formula.