Utilisation du Neem (Azadirachta indica) en agriculture

Azadirachta indica, better known as neem or neem, is a deciduous tree native to India. Its vernacular name means “who cures all diseases, all ills; which gives good health. Of tropical origin from the south of the Himalayas, it is found today as far as sub Saharan Africa.
It belongs to the Meliaceae family like Ekebergia capensis Sparrm., Khaya senegalensis (Desr.) A. Juss., Pseudocedrela kotschyi (Schweinf.) Harms, Trichilia emetica Vahl.
Order: Spindales
Family: Meliaceae
Genre: Azadirachta
Leaves, fruits, bark, seeds and roots, all its parts can be used in multiple applications. We will focus here exclusively on its uses in agriculture.
Description of neem
The tree
Neem in the open field
Neem in the open field
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavaud
The tree measures between 5 and 15 to 20 meters high (30 to 40 meters maximum). With a straight bole, the maximum height of its trunk is 7.5 meters for a diameter of 0.9 metres. Its rounded crown is always green, its round crown can reach 10 meters in diameter.
Its gray brown bark is cracked longitudinally and diagonally, its edge is dark red. The wood is hard, heavy and red to brown in color, its density is 720 930 kilograms per cubic meter.
It is adapted to sub arid and sub humid conditions, with an annual rainfall of 400 to 1200 millimetres. It tolerates high temperatures (32 to 40° Celsius), but does not support temperatures below 4° Celsius. Its lifespan is more than 200 years.
its leaves
The leaves are found at the end of the branches. They consist of 5 to 8 pairs of opposite leaflets, distributed on a petiole 15 to 25 centimeters long with a thickened base.
The leaf blade is lanceolate, sickle shaped, with sharply toothed edges, 7 to 10 centimeters high and 2 to 3 centimeters wide. Their top is long acuminate, the base very asymmetrical, the upper side more or less rounded, the lower side wedge shaped is more or less acute. Their vein is pinnate, not very prominent, with 20 to 25 parallel veins.
Olivier Lavaud
Azadirachta indica is not recommended in the context of multi storey agriculture (agroforestry): its highly developed roots, especially on the surface, are too strong a competition to be able to cultivate there nearby.
its flowers
Neem flower also called neem tree
Neem flower also called neem tree
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavaud
The panicle inflorescence is loose and very flowery, arranged at the base of the leaves, 10 to 25 centimeters long. The inflorescences carry from 150 to 250 flowers. Bisexual flowers and male flowers exist on the same individual.
The flowers are white to pale yellow, very fragrant, pedicellate (0.5 to 1.5 centimeters long), with 5 spreading petals bearing in the center the stamens united in a tube, about 1 centimeter in diameter. Pollination is carried out by insects.
its fruits
The fruit, ovoid drupe, glabrous, 1.5 to 2.8 centimeters long and 1.2 to 1.5 centimeters wide, yellow when ripe, usually contains only a seed embedded in a viscous pulp and more or less less sweet. The skin is thin and the pulp sweet to slightly bitter. Its kernel, with a brown integument, is elongated (1 to 2 centimeters long). At maturity, it can produce up to 50 kilograms of fruit per year, or about 30 kilograms of seeds.
Its roots
Its root system is deep, allowing it to resist drought. It takes root in all types of deep, well drained soils, stony to sandy, with a pH of 6.2 to 7.
The tree is often planted as a windbreak, suitable for fixing dunes, and thus participates in the fight against desertification. It cannot grow in waterlogged soil.
Propagation and maintenance
It is propagated by sowing, cuttings or air layering of roots and shoots. The seeds have a short lifespan, 2 to 3 months maximum.
The tree resists pruning and pruning well, thus limiting shade for crops and thus producing wood on a regular basis.
Olivier Lavaud
I was able to see its adaptability in poor, ferralitic soils in Togo, or in mountainous semi desert areas in northern Benin.
Use in the agricultural environment
Incorporation of neem leaves in cultivation
Incorporation of neem leaves in cultivation
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavaud
The tree is planted as an ornament around cultivated plots, with shade and windbreak functions. It can be used in mono specific reforestation to help restore soils in poor condition. Indeed, it has the ability to develop a very powerful, deep root system, allowing it to resist drought and fix the soil on the surface. Its leaves form a rich litter which, little by little, nourishes the planting space.
Azadirachta indica is not recommended in the context of multi storey agriculture (agroforestry): its highly developed roots, especially on the surface, are too strong a competition to be able to cultivate there nearby. It should be noted that Azadirachta indica is locally invasive and tends to substitute for local species.
Azadirachta indica is primarily used for its insecticidal action, but its role as an amendment and wood production in arid regions should not be underestimated. It is planted near villages to facilitate access to sought after products and services such as shade, pharmacopoeia, energy and construction wood.
Finalization of incorporation of neem leaves in cculture
Finalization of the incorporation of neem leaves in cultivation
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavaud
The first active ingredient in the leaves, and especially the seeds, is azadirachtin (C35H44O16). Its action causes disturbances in the feeding of pests. This substance is also found in Mélia azedarach, a tree mainly present in Asia, Australia and the Pacific, supporting up to  10° Celsius. Azardirachtin acts by ingestion and contact. The main effect is interference with post embryonic development, as a growth regulator. The second reduces the craving for nutrition and, indirectly, negatively affects the fertility of adults as well as that of eggs. The repellent effect of the solution is due to its strong bitterness.
This molecule represents a danger for bee larvae, causes liver and lung damage in certain mammals. It is identified as a possible endocrine disruptor and is considered a genotoxic carcinogen. The studies contradict each other, it is difficult to objectively measure the risks of this substance. As with any use of an active product, occasional, reasoned and targeted use is recommended. Individual protections are necessary for spraying.
Olivier Lavaud
Leaves, fruits, bark, seeds and roots, all its parts can be used in multiple applications.
Use of sheets
neem leaves
neem leaves
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavaud
As a molluscicide, against snails and slugs.
As a repellent against rodents, termites and birds.
Eaten by goats and camels.
For the external deworming of livestock (infusion or oil): ringworm, ticks, fleas, etc.
As a mulch or to incorporate into the soil 15 days before sowing or transplanting, it limits the population of nematode worms in the soil and fertilizes the soil.
Incorporated into compost, average value in grams per kilogram of dry matter: Calcium 16.7; Nitrogen 18.7; Phosphorus 9.2; does not contain Potassium(4).
Use of seeds
As a molluscicide against snails and slugs.
As a repellent against rodents, termites and birds.
As a fertilizer and biostimulant (powdered and sprinkled on the ground).
As a seed saving insecticide against weevils, bruchids (powdered and mixed with seeds).
As an insecticide against many insects (more than 200), such as aphids, whiteflies, grasshoppers, mites, nematodes, Colorado potato beetle, Crambidae, etc.
To fight against certain diseases such as powdery mildew, flavescence dorée in viticulture and root rot.
For livestock feed in pellets of crushed kernels (40% protein and 7% lipids).
Use of cake after oil extraction
As a fertilizer to incorporate on the surface, at the rate of 4 tonnes per hectare: it enriches the soil with organic matter and nutrients, also reduces nitrogen losses by inhibiting nitrification (Aderni, 2006; Azim et al., 2011) . Its content can reach 3.7% nitrogen, 0.94% phosphorus and 1.19% potassium (Rao et al. 2014).
Examples of preparations
leaf based insecticide
Neem leaves and petiole
Neem leaves and petiol
CHALLENGE Ecological   Olivier Lavau
Grind or pound 1 kilogram of fresh leaves.
Put the leaves in 5 liters of water (rain or borehole), leave to macerate overnight.
Remove the leaves, strain the mixture through a fine cloth.
Dilute to 10% (1 liter of extract per 10 liters of water), add liquid soap (black soap), at the rate of 100 milliliters per 10 liters of solution. It takes 80 kilograms of leaves and 400 liters of water to treat 1 hectare of fields.
Spray in the evening, the solution being sensitive to the sun.
Apply twice a week in heavily infested areas, stop spraying 4 days before harvest.
Seed based insecticide
Pick or collect ripe fruit (yellow color).
Remove the pulp, put it back in the field directly, it is a fertilizer.
Remove moldy seeds, dry in a thin layer in a dry, ventilated and shaded place. Store dried seeds in bags away from moisture.
Take an old mortar (the seeds have a very strong smell), pound gently to remove the shell and not break the almond. Separate the shells from the almonds, sort to remove the moldy almonds. Hulls can be used as mulch on crop beds.
Gently crush the almonds so as not to extract the oil.
Mix 500 grams of the powder obtained in 10 liters of water, leave to stand overnight. In the event of a major attack, put 1.5 kilograms of powder for 10 liters of water.
Filter through a fine cloth.
Dilute to 5% (1.5 liters of extract for 10 liters of water), add liquid soap (itsvon noir), at the rate of 100 milliliters per 10 liters of solution.
As the solution is sensitive to the sun, spray in the evening (one spray every 10 days). Once the mixture is ready, use it the same evening in order to be as effective as possible.
Example of use
The Maison Familiale de Formation Rurale de Manga in Togo offers training in multi tier farming techniques (December 2020).
In this context, leaves are used to amend a market gardening area: a mixture of acacia sp. and neem was incorporated into the soil of two crop beds. The objective is to improve the texture of the soil, by adding fresh organic matter and reducing the presence of nematodes (thanks to neem), in order to allow the transplanting of tomatoes in this space.
To conclude
Azadirachta indica promises great prospects for its use in agriculture or for reforestation. It is increasingly used around the world and its growth in Africa is significant.
I was able to see its adaptability in poor, ferralitic soils in Togo, or in mountainous semi desert areas in northern Benin. Its many spontaneous shoots at the foot of large trees, or around plantations, show that it has the ability to colonize its environment quite easily and that it can therefore be considered an invasive species.
For its use as an insecticide in an agricultural environment, I would like to reiterate my advice for rational use. Admittedly, it is a natural, biodegradable product, but like any active product, it contains molecules that can have harmful effects on certain organisms.
Any action, in the natural or cultivated environment, has an impact on the balance of ecosystems. It is essential to have the least possible impact on them, in order to produce quality food while preserving our environment.