Neem (Azadirachta indica): prehistory to contemporary medicinal uses to humankind.

Abstract 
The divine tree neem (Azadirachta indica) is mainly cultivated in the Indian subcontinent. Neem has been used extensively by humankind to treat various ailments before the availability of written records which recorded the beginning of history. The world health organization estimates that 80% of the population living in the developing countries relies exclusively on traditional medicine for their primary health care. More than half of the world's population still relies entirely on plants for medicines, and plants supply the active ingredients of most traditional medical products. The review shows the neem has been used by humankind to treat various ailments from prehistory to contemporary.
Introduction
Neem is an omnipotent tree and a sacred gift of nature. Neem tree is mainly cultivated in the Indian subcontinent. Neem is a member of the mahogany family, Meliaceae. Today it is known by the botanical name Azadirachta indica (A. indica) A. Juss. Neem has been used extensively by humankind to treat various ailments before the availability of written records which recorded the beginning of history. Since prehistoric times, neem has been used by humankind.
The latinized name of neem, Azadirachta indica, is derived from the Persian. Azad means “free”; dirakht means “tree”; i-Hind means “of Indian origin”. Hence it literally means “the free tree of India”[1]. The neem tree is an incredible plant that has been declared the “Tree of the 21st century” by the United Nations[2]. The US National Academy of Science published a report in 1992 entitled “Neem: A tree for solving global problems”[3].
2. Neem during prehistoric times
The age of the earth is (4.54±0.05) billion years. Plants from the supercontinent spread onto the land 475 million years ago. Anatomically modern humans inhabited 200 000 years ago[4]. Pangaea was a supercontinent that existed during the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic eras, forming about 300 million years ago. The name Pangaea is derived from ancient Greek pan meaning “entire”, and Gaia meaning “earth”. The single global ocean which surrounded Pangaea is accordingly named Panthalassa[5].
Pangaea broke into two pieces, one in the north, and the other in the south (Figure 1)[5]. Scientists called the two new continents Laurasia (the continent in the north), and Gondwanaland (the continent in the south).
The concept of Lemuria was born in the 1860s when certain British geologists noted the striking similarity between rock formations and fossils found in India and Africa. Maps of the lost land were produced taking the idea from the palaeo-continent of Gondwana that existed from approximately 510 to 180 million years ago.
It separated from Laurasia 200-180 million years ago during the breakup of Pangaea. Two hundred million years ago, the continents of Antarctica, South America, Africa, India and Australia were joined together as a single supercontinent known as Gondwana, or Gondwanaland[6].
In the research of Joseph, the existence of a land is called Lemuria, which is one of the world's oldest civilizations about 2.0 lakhs years ago[7]. Due to tsunami, people regularly moved from the Island Mu to Atlantis in Mexican Sea and Kumari Kandam in Indian Ocean about 100 000 years ago.
Kumari Kandam is said to have been located in the Indian Ocean, to the south of present day Kanyakumari district, Tamil Nadu at the southern tip of India[10]. There are certain references in Tamil Sangam (Sangam literature) classics to a landmass where people lived and which was swallowed up by the sea. The literary references of the lost land were about three Tamil Sangams (Academy of poets). The other meaning of Sangams is assemblies of siddhars.
First two Sangams taking place in a sunken land mass was called Kumari Kandam. The first Tamil Sangam located in Thenmadurai, had 4 449 poets and 549 members including the father of Siddha medicine Agathiyar and lasted for 4 440 years. The head of Sangam was Agathiyar.
On the Indian subcontinent, the neem tree has been used for more than 4 500 years. The earliest documentation of neem mentioned the fruit, seeds, oil, leaves, roots and bark for their advantageous medicinal properties.
The first recorded indication that neem was being used in the medical treatment was about 4 500 years ago. This was the high point of the Indian Harappa culture, one of the great civilizations in the ancient world. There is evidence found from excavations at Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro in Northwestern and Western India, in which several therapeutic compounds including neem leaves, were gathered in the ruins.
In 1922, British archaeologists began to excavate the sites of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. They uncovered the remains of long-forgotten cities. British archaeologists discovered the 5 000 year-old Indus Valley civilization. They were amazed to discover two cities - Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa. These cities were so advanced that they could practically compete with cities today in areas of architecture, engineering and construction. The streets were designed in a grid system that was well planned and organized. There was an underground sewer system with stone manhole covers for access. A sophisticated water supply and drainage system with waterproof brickwork ran throughout the city. The houses were spacious in the upper class sections containing modern amenities like lavatory facilities.
They also found skulls upon which cranial surgery had been performed, and clay pots, which contained medicinal herbs. One of the most prominent medicinal herbs they found was A. indica, which is also known as neem. It shows the first evidence of an advanced medical system that includes both surgery and phytopharmacology in one of the world's most ancient and developed civilizations[23].
At the beginning of this century, the neem tree was still highly esteemed by Indian emigrants who took it along to the places where they settled. Thus, the neem tree was introduced in places such as Australia, East and sub-Sahelian Africa, South East Asia, and South America. Today, the neem is well established in at least 30 countries worldwide, in Asia, Africa and Central and South America. Some small scale plantations are also reportedly successful in Europe and United States of America.
Neem trees are fast growers, and in three years may grow to 20 feet in height from seed planting. It will grow where rainfall is only 18 inches per year and it thrives in areas of extreme heat up to 120 degrees. It is estimated that a neem tree has a productive life span of 150 - 200 years. It is estimated that there are around 18 millions neem trees in India.
Neem tree is found all over in Malaysia. It exists mainly in Kedah, Penang, Langkawi and Perlis. Neem tree is found widely in Sungai Petani, Kedah, Malaysia.
Neem trees were also introduced in Pan Zhi Hua, Sichuan province, China[24]. There are over 400 000 neems in Yunnan province that make Yunnan the biggest artificial area of neem planting globally and the raw material center of neem products in China. In 1995, the researcher of Chinese Academy of Forestry introduced the neem in India to the hot river valley areas in Yunnan and the neem grows well there. The research group has introduced the neem from South Asia, Southeast Asia and Africa to China since 1997. In 1998, the demonstration of industrial neem planting was started out in China. Because of the advantages on climate and terrain, the neem planting was popularized and promoted in Yunnan rapidly. Yunnan has had the largest area of neem plantation. Chinese Academy of Forestry plays an important role in cultivating technology of neem[25].
In the last two decades, research on neem has been intensified and many of the agricultural and medical properties of neem were rediscovered. Today, neem plays a major role in the rural industry of India, and projects for the commercial use of neem have been successfully introduced in the places like Kenya[26].
Earlier this century, people somehow managed to introduce this Indian tree to West Africa, where it has since grown well. They probably expected neem to be useful only as a source of shade and medicinal especially for malaria. But in Ghana, it has become the leading producer of firewood for the densely populated Accra Plains, and from Somalia to Mauritania, it is a leading candidate for helping halt the southward spread of the Sahara Desert. A. indica is an extensively popular tree in Nigeria and is commonly referred to as Neem (English), “Dogon Yaro” (Hausa) and “Akun shorop” (Igbo). Senegal Neem Foundation (SNF) was created by Dr. D. D. Faye, as a crucial part of Africa Bound Corporation. Africa considers neem as a green gold. In Senegal, neem tree is known as the “Independence Tree”[27].
The world's largest neem plantations are 10 sq km in the plains of Arafat, Saudi Arabia. A Saudi philanthropist planted 50 000 neem trees to shade and comforts the two million pilgrims[28]. In the last decade, neem has been introduced into the Caribbean, where it is being used to help reforest several nations. Neem is already a major tree species in Haiti.
Contemporary medicinal uses of neem in humankind
Neem (A. indica) is a divine tree mainly cultivated in Indian subcontinent and it is commonly known as neem[31],[32]. All the parts of A. indica tree is commonly used in traditional Indian medicine for household remedy against various human diseases[33]. Indian people have long revered the neem tree (A. indica). For centuries, millions have cleaned their teeth with neem twigs, smeared skin disorders with neem leaf juice, taken neem tea as a tonic, and placed neem leaves in their beds, books, grain bins, cupboards, and closets to keep away troublesome bugs. The tree has relieved so many different pains, fevers, infections, and other complaints so that it has been called “the village pharmacy.” In rural India, peoples often used water decoction of neem leaves for the prevention and treatment of various ailments. Research undertaken in the University of Nigeria showed the medicinal properties of fractionated acetone/water neem leaf extract[34]. Tests conducted at the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Chennai in December 2012 found that the Siddha neem preparation brought down symptoms and speeded up the recovery of patients affected by dengue[35].
To those millions in India, neem has miraculous powers, and now scientists around the world are beginning to think they may be right. Two decades of researches have revealed promising results in so many disciplines that this obscure species may be of enormous benefit to countries both poor and rich. Even some of the most cautious researchers are saying that “Neem deserves to be called a wonder plant”.
9.1. Antibacterial activity
Recent research shows the isolation and identification of the antibacterial active compound from petroleum ether extract of neem oil[36]. The study of Zhong et al. showed an antibacterial activity of 9-octadecanoic acid-hexadecanoic acid-tetrahydrofuran-3,4-diyl ester from neem oil[37]. Elavarasu et al. studied in vitro anti-plaque microbial activity of neem oil[38].
9.2. Antiviral
Galhardi et al. studied the in vitro antiviral property of Azadirachta indica polysaccharides for poliovirus[39]. The study of Saha et al. showed water extracted polysaccharides from A. indica leaves with anti-bovine herpes virus type 1 (BoHV-1) activity[40]. The research of Xu et al. showed the in vitro antiviral activity of neem seed kernel extracts against duck plague virus[41]. Tiwari et al. showed the in vitro antiviral activity of neem (A. indica L.) bark extract against herpes simplex virus type-1 infection[42].
9.3. Sexually transmitted disease
Few researchers have focused on neem efficacy in treating sexually transmitted diseases. The reports that have been completed are overwhelmingly positive. Recent research of Shokeen et al. showed the evaluation of the activity of 16 medicinal plants against Neisseria gonorrhoeae[43].
9.4. Neem and the immune system
Thoh et al. studied that azadirachtin interacts with the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) binding domain of its receptors and inhibits TNF induced biological responses[44].
9.5. Anti-inflammatory activity
The study of Alam et al. showed the anti-inflammatory activity of epoxyazadiradione against macrophage migration inhibitory factor[45]. Thoh et al. found that azadirachtin interacts with retinoic acid receptors and inhibits retinoic acid-mediated biological responses[46].
9.6. Antioxidant effect
Manikandan et al. researched that antioxidant and protective effects of active neem leaf fractions against hydrogen peroxide induced oxidative damage to pBR322 DNA and red blood cells[47].
9.7. Anticarcinogenic activity
Chatterjee et al. showed that identification of a sulfonoquinovosyldiacylglyceride from A. indica and studies on its cytotoxic activity and DNA binding properties[48]. Perumal et al. studied ethanolic neem (A. indica A. Juss) leaf extract induced apoptosis and inhibits the IGF signaling pathway in breast cancer cell lines[49]. Aravindan et al. showed that molecular basis of ‘hypoxic’ breast cancer cell radio-sensitization with phytochemicals[50]. Induction of apoptosis in human breast cancer cells by nimbolide were carried out by Elumalai et al[51]. Srivastava et al. showed that neem oil limonoids induces p53-independent apoptosis and autophagy[52]. A review of the anticancer biology of Azadirachta indica was carried out by Paul et al[53]. Research of Veeraraghavan et al. showed the effect of neem leaf extract on rel protein-regulated cell death/radiosensitization in pancreatic cancer cells[54]. Mahapatra et al. showed novel molecular targets of Azadirachta indica associated with inhibition of tumor growth in prostate cancer [55].
9.8. Skin diseases
Neem has a remarkable effect on chronic skin conditions. Acne, psoriasis, eczema, ringworm and even stubborn warts are among the conditions that can clear up easily when high quality, organic neem oil is used. Neem oil and leaves has been used in Siddha medicine for the treatment of skin diseases[56]. In addition, neem oil can be used as an excellent component of cosmetics to help clear, beautify and rejuvenate the skin.
9.9. Antisnake venom activity
Ashis et al. studied a snake venom phospholipase A2 (PLA2) inhibitor (AIPLAI) was isolated from leaves of A. indica (neem) and the mechanism of PLA2 inhibition by AIPLAI in vitro condition was also studied[57].
9.10. Digestive disorders
Neem is generally accepted in the ayurvedic medical tradition as a therapy for ulcers and other types of gastric discomfort. Neem promotes a healthy digestive system by protecting the stomach, aiding in elimination and removing toxins and harmful bacteria. Bandyopadhyay et al. studied the neem bark extract of gastroprotective effect[58].
9.11. Parasitic diseases
Historically, neem has been used to rid the body of all forms of parasites. Neem quickly kills external and internal parasites. Neem extracts have hormone mimics that interfere with the life cycle of parasites, inhibit their ability to feed and prevent the eggs from hatching. Abdel et al. studied the efficacy of a single treatment of head lice with a neem seed extract[59]. Luong et al. found that neem leaf slurry is a sustainable, natural product and anopheline larvicide in west African Villages[60].
10. Conclusion
This article clearly shows that neem (A. indica) has been used by humankind to treat various ailments from prehistory to contemporary.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. T. Thirunarayanan, Centre for Traditional Medicine and Research (CTMR), Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. This work was financially supported by Digitalization of Tamil Siddha Palm Manuscripts, Project of Centre For Traditional Medicine and Research (CTMR), Department of AYUSH, Government of India (Grant No: Z28016/14/2010IEC).
Notes
Comments
Background
A majority of the world population in developing and low income countries relies on traditional medicine for their primary health care. In this context, neem tree is a promising prospect for the alleviation of common health problems in the developing world. The manuscript emphasizes the historical links of neem tree with ancient medicines systems around the globe and its role in health care systems in the ancient medicine. It also stresses the need for its further exploration and its incorporation into modern medicine.
Research frontiers
The authors had highlighted the biodiversified applications of neem tree in the ancient health care system with well supported literature. The historical links of neem tree with human evolution and its application in health care management have been widely discussed. It also calls for further exploration of the biopotential of neem tree in its utilization in modern medicine.
Related reports
The authors had presented the manuscript in a well organized manner and the literature support for the claims and postulations had been correlating well.
Innovations and breakthroughs
The manuscript provides a detailed description of the existing historical evidences of neem tree with the mankind and its application in health care systems from ancient times to the modern medicine. It portraits a clear description of neem tree and its broad biopotential activity.
Applications
The recommendation of the present studies emphasizes on exploration of neem tree as a major source for development of more therapeutic molecules and creation of more scientific evidences for its various medicinal applications.
Peer review
The manuscript is convincing and is based on the diversified application of neem tree. The article has been highlighted with the historical links of neem tree with the ancient medicines. It also gives a detailed description of the existing historical evidences of need tree with the mankind and in medicine. It has provided a new insight into the exploration and utilization of neem tree as a source for development of new therapeutic molecules.