Neem (Azadirachta indica) feedipedia

eem (Azadirachta indica A. Juss.) is a multipurpose tree that is highly popular in India, where it provides food and insecticide, and is used for its great number of ethnomedicinal properties. Neem leaves and the oil cake resulting from oil extraction can be used for livestock feeding, but the raw cake is poorly palatable, toxic and requires processing.
Morphology
Neem is a medium sized tree, reaching 15 to 30 m in height, with a large rounded crown up to 10 20 m in diameter. It is mainly evergreen but sometimes shed its leaves during the dry season (Orwa et al., 2009; Puri, 1999). Neem has a deep taproot and is a mycorrhizal dependent species. The bark is grey, becomes fissured and flakes in old trees. A sticky foetid sap exudates from old trees in humid climates (Orwa et al., 2009; Puri, 1999). The branches are numerous and spreading. The leaves are alternate, petiolated, clustered at the end of the branches, unequally pinnate, glabrous and dark glossy green at maturity, 20 40 cm in length and bearing 10 20 leaflets (FAO, 2015). The leaflets are 5 10 cm long 1.2 4 cm broad, sickle shaped and slightly denticulate (FAO, 2015; Orwa et al., 2009; Puri, 1999). The flowers are numerous, fragrant, white and borne in large clusters (up to 30 cm long). Neem fruits are 1 2 cm long drupes, smooth and green with white milky juice when unripe, turning to yellow to brown when mature. They have a thin epicarp, a mucilagenous fleshy mesocarp and a hard endocarp. They contain a variable number of ovoid (1 2 cm) oil seeds (Orwa et al., 2009; Puri, 1999).
Utilisation
Neem is a multipurpose tree. People consume its fruits raw or cooked, and sometimes eat the young twigs and flowers as vegetables (Orwa et al., 2009). Neem leaves, bark and seed extracts have been used for centuries in India in ethnomedicine and ethnoveterinary medicine (Biswas et al., 2002; Subapriya et al., 2005). The seeds are an important source of azadirachtin, a limonoid compound (triterpenoid) present in the seeds, and also to some extent in leaves and other tissues. It acts as an insect repellent, inhibiting them from feeding, thus disrupting their growth, metamorphosis and reproduction (Orwa et al., 2009). Extracts or crude parts of the tree are often mixed with stored seeds such as maize, rice and beans, in order to protect them against insects (Boeke et al., 2004). In India, neem based pesticides have been developed (Orwa et al., 2009). Neem extracts can protect plants from foliage eating insects without affecting pollinating insects such as honeybees. Other neem limonoids have various properties. Melantriol and salannin act as antifeedants for insects. Nimbin and nimbindin (the latter a bitter compound present in the seed at 2%) were reported to have antiviral activity (Bostid, 1992). The oil extracted from the seeds has industrial uses and is widely used in ethnomedicine in India. However, it contains various toxic substances (including some added to increase its alleged therapeutic effect) and has been the cause of the death of children (Jindal et al., 2012; Sundaravalli et al., 1982). Neem provides valuable firewood, makes good charcoal and provides various environmental services (Orwa et al., 2009) (see Environmental impact below).
The use of neem products for animal feeding remains limited. While neem leaves can be an occasional forage for ruminants and rabbits, neem seed oil cake, resulting from oil extraction of whole seeds (neem seed cake), or decorticated seeds (neem seed kernel cake), is usually considered as a non edible oil cake only to be used as organic nitrogenous fertilizer (Ramachandran et al., 2007). Neem seed cake is a protein rich ingredient and its use by farmers has been recorded, for instance in Southern India (Christopher, 1970). However, its unpalatability and toxicity have prevented its widespread use in livestock feeding. This product has been described as a promising potential feed ingredient since the 1970s and there have been a considerable number of attempts at rendering it suitable for livestock. While some detoxification processes do work in the laboratory, the most recent review considered that there were still many technical, economical and food safety issues to be solved before these products could be recommended for livestock (Dutta et al., 2012).
Distribution 
Neem is native of dry areas of the Indian subcontinent, Myanmar and China (Rojas Sandoval et al., 2014). It was naturally distributed in Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia and has become one of the most widespread trees in tropical and subtropical areas. It has become invasive in the Caribbean (Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic), sub Saharan Africa (Kenya, Gambia, Senegal, Guinea Bissau, Ghana, Tanzania), and the Pacific (Australia, Fiji, Marshall Islands) (Rojas Sandoval et al., 2014).
Neem naturally occurs in dry deciduous and thorn forests, or acacia forests. In its exotic range, it has become invasive in a number of habitats including fallow agricultural land, savannah, and dry arid forests (coastal forest in Ghana, lowland monsoon forest in Indonesia, evergreen and dry deciduous forest in Africa) (Orwa et al., 2009). Neem can be found from sea level up to an altitude of 1500 m in places where average annual rainfall ranges from 400 to 1200 mm and where average annual maximum temperatures may be as high as 40°C. Adult trees tolerate some frost but seedlings are sensitive to it. Neem can grow on a wide range of soils, from acidic to alkaline pH, but it does better on shallow, stony, sandy, poor soils, in marginal sloping places or on rocky crevices (Puri, 1999). Neem is a full sunlight species but it can withstand some shade in its first years (Orwa et al., 2009). Neem is able to extract nutrients from highly leached sandy soils and can survive extreme pH conditions, from 3 to 9 (Rojas Sandoval et al., 2014). In well drained soils, neem withstands up to 2500 mm rainfall. Neem has some tolerance of salinity and has been used in sugarcane plantations with a significant soil salinity (Orwa et al., 2009; Ahmed et al., 1997).
Processes 
Because of the toxicity of neem seed cake, many processes have been investigated since the 1970s to reduce its antinutritional effects on livestock. Water washing, methanol extraction, urea and alkali treatments have all shown promising results. However, the standardisation of those techniques, their economic feasibility and the effect of such processes in meat, egg and dairy products have not yet been thoroughly investigated (Abbeddou et al., 2012; Dutta et al., 2012).
Forage management 
A mature neem tree can produce 350 kg of leaves per year (Göhl, 1982). 

