Neem (Azadirachta indica): A Review on Medicinal Kalpavriksha

Neem, has thrown the light worldwide in  recent years, due  to its  wide range of medicinal properes. The tree  has been  largely used in Naturopathy, Unani and Homoeopathic medicine and has become a lodestar of current medicine. Further it elaborates a vast array of biologi-cally acve compounds that are chemically diverse and structurally complex. More than 150 compounds have been isolated from dierent parts of neem and these have been divided into two major classes isoprenoids and non-isoprenoids, which are proteins and carbohydrates. Further, it consists of sulphurous compounds, polyphenolic compounds such as avonoids and their glycosides, dihydrochalcone, coumarin, tannins and aliphac compounds. All parts of the neem tree viz., leaves, owers, seeds, fruits, roots and bark have been used tradionally for the treatment of inammaon, infecons, fever, skin diseases, dental disorders, etc. Every part of the neem tree viz., roots, seeds, ow-ers, bark, leaves, fruit pulp and its constuents have been demonstrated to exhibit immune modulatory, an-inammatory, an hypergly-caemic, anulcer, anmalarial, anfungal, anbacterial, anviral, anoxidant, anmutagenic, andiabec and ancarcinogenic properes.
Azadirachta indica  is  popularly known  as Indian  neem  or margosa tree. It’s been extensively  used in ayurveda, unani and  homoeopathic  medicine since  time  immemorial.   In Sanskrit a “good health”  condion is expressed as “Nimba” (Sitasiwi et al., 2018), which on due me derived in to “Neem”, further the tree is considered as “Sarvaroga nivarini” means cure all ailments. In Ayurveda neem is known as “Arishtha” meaning  ‘reliever  of sickness’.  The  tree  is  still regarded as  “village  pharmacy”  or “Divine  tree” due  to presence  of medicinal  properes  in India  (Amritalingam, 2001). If  the developing countries  are considered more  than 80% of  the populaon is believed to be dependent on medicinal plants for curing various diseases or disorders (Rupani and Chavez, 2018).  Further,  the  total  trade in  medicinal plants  in India during  2004-05  has  been 4,530  crore. India ranks  second in the world in  terms of the volume and  value of  medicinal plants export. Neem is one of the indigenous medicinal plants of  India  which possess  medicinal  properes in  each and every part viz., roots, seeds, owers, bark, leaves, fruit pulp etc. (Kirkar and Basu, 1975). Neem is one of the examples of complementary  medicine through phytotherapy  (Jose et al., 2020). Each of the plant part has been used in the Indian Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine and has become a cynosure of modern medicine In Ayurvedic literature neem is well known for its medicinal 
properes viz., Neem bark is cool, bier, astringent and acrid. In addion to this, it is used to cure redness, cough, fever, loss of appete, worm  infestaon etc. It also heals wounds and  viated  condions of  kapha, voming, skin  diseases, excessive  thirst  and diabetes.  Along  the bark,  chemical compounds present in the leaves are reported to be valuable for eye disorders and insect poisons. It treats Vak disorder and acts as an-leproc. It’s fruits are bier, purgave, an-hemorrhoids and anthelminthic’. In the view of its immense ulies, this review summarizes the wide range of medicinal uses, pharmacological acvies, biological acvies of neem tree and its compounds and their chemistry. 2.  Neem Compounds and Biological AcvityMore than 150 compounds have been isolated from dierent parts of neem. The compounds have been divided into  two major classes; isoprenoid (Chaerjee and Pakrashi, 1991) like diterpenoids  and  triterpenoids  containing protomeliacins, limonoids,  azadirone  and its  derivaves, gedunin  and  its derivaves, vilasinin type of compounds and C- secomeliacins such as nimbin, salanin and azadirachn) and non-isoprenoids, which are proteins, carbohydrates, sulphurous compounds, polyphenolics  such  as  flavonoids  and their  glycosides, dihydrochalcone, coumarin and tannins, aliphac compounds, etc. Nimbidin, is responsible for  crude bier principle extracted
from  the  oil of  seed  kernels of  A. indica  which possess several biological acvies, from this crude principle some tetranortriterpenes, including nimbin, nimbinin, nimbidinin, nimbolide  and  nimbidic  acid have  been isolated  (Siddiqui, 1942; Schumacher  et  al.,  2011;  Naik et  al., 2014).  Further, Biswas et  al.  (2002)  have  reviewed the  biological  acvies some of the neem compounds,  pharmacological acons  of the  neem  extracts, clinical  study and  plausible  medicinal applications  of  neem along  with their  safety  evaluation. Further,  neem also  possess compounds  acts as  Anti-inflammatory,  Antiarthritic,  Antipyretic, Hypoglycaemic, Antigastric  ulcer,  Spermicidal, Antifungal,  Antibacterial, Diurec, Anmalarial,  Antumour,  Immunomodulatory  etc (Joshi, et al., 2010; Saleem, et al., 2018).3.  Chemistry of Neem CompoundsNatural  compounds  present in  neem  are triterpenes  or limonoids. New limonoids are sll being discovered in neem. Azadirachn, salannin, meliantriol and nimbin are well known (Naik et al., 2014). The bier constuent, the nimbin contains an acetoxy, a lactone, an ester, a methoxy and an aldehyde group. Nimbidin contains sulphur. 3.1.  BarkThe bark  exudes a clean bright  amber coloured gum which is collected in small  tears or fragments. It contains a  bier alkaloid  named  “margosine”.  Leaves also  bier principles but in small quanty which are much more soluble in water. This substance is a  hydrate of the resin. Seeds  contain 10% to 31% of a yellow bier xed oil with a strong disagreeable acrid taste. The volale fay acids present in the bark consist a mixture of stearic and oleic acids along lile amount of lauric acid. Trunk  bark yields 0.04%  nimbin, 0.001 nimbinin,  0.4% nimbidin,  and  essenal  oil  0.02%. Tetracyclic  triterpenoids and their derivaves have been isolated from the stem bark along with tricyclic diterpenoids).3.2.  FlowersFlowers have been found to contain a avonoid. Nimbicen is idencal to kaempferol. In the dried bark the same bier components as in  the  seed  oil have been found  and in the pericarp of the fruit a bier principle bakayanin was found.3.3.  Neem oilNeem  oil  contains  Sulphur  0.427%;  a  very bier  yellowish substance obtained from the alcoholic extract of the oil, which is supposed to be an alkaloid; resins; glucosides and fay acids3.4.  SeedsMeliacins  found  in  the  seeds  include  gedunin,  7-desacetylgedunin, desace-tylnimbin and azedarachn.The seed oil mainly contains nimbidin, nimbin and nimbinin, which also occur in the stembark (Ara et al., 1989).3.5.  ToddyThe  toddy  or  sap  contains glucose,  sucrose,  gums  and colouring maer.4.  
Medicinal Uses
AyurvedaNeem tree has occupied a prominent place in the tradional Ayurvedic  medicine  in  India from  me immemorial.  Neem bark,  leaf  extracts  and  neem oil  have been under  use  as folk  medicine  to control  various  problems viz.,  leprosy, intesnal  helminthiasis,  conspaon,  etc. Further,  it plays vital role in treang rheumasm, chronic syphilic sores and indolent  ulcers.  Neem  oil is  well known  to control  various skin problems. Bark, leaf, root, ower and fruit together cure blood morbidity, biliary aicons, itching, skin ulcers, burning sensaons and pthysis (Saleem et al., 2018).The  root  bark  and young  fruits are  used  as  an alterave, antiperiodic  and as  a tonic.  Green twigs  are used  as toothbrushes  for  cleaning  teeth and  as a prophylacc  for mouth and  teeth  complaints. The bark,  gum, leaf and seed are used in snake bite and scorpion sng. The bark is used as a bier tonic, astringent, anperiodic, anpyrec and against nausea  and  voming.  Gum is  demulcent tonic  in catarrhal aecons. Leaves are used as poulce for boils. Decocon of leaves used as an ansepc in ulcers and eczema. Dry owers are stomachic. Seed  oil  is a smulant, ansepc,  alterave in  rheumatism  and skin  diseases.  Berries are  purgative, emollient and anthelminthic. An extract of leaves is used in toothpastes. Neem oil is eecve in the treatment of leprosy and skin diseases.4.2.  HomoeopathyUsed against rheumac pains. Pain in sternum and ribs, in the extremies and  aches in hands and  toes. Also used  against eczema, pemphigus and scabies.4.3.  UnaniNeem  nds  use  as a  resolvent and  blood  purier. Leaves expel  wind,  heal ulcers  in  urinary passages.  Used  as an emmenagogue  and  in skin  diseases.  Fruit is  used as  an astringent and in leprosy and bronchis.4.4.  Immunosmulant acvityVarious studies have revealed that the aqueous extract of leaf and bark possesses  ancomplement  and  immunosmulant acvity.  Neem  oil has  been shown  to  possess acvity  by selecvely acvang the cell-mediated immune mechanisms to elicit  an enhanced response to  subsequent mitogenic or angenic challenge (Sen et al.,1992; Biswas et al., 2002).4.5.  Hypoglycaemic acvityNeem leaf  extracts  showed promising results in  decreasing blood sugar level and prevents adrenaline as well as glucose-induced hyperglycaemia. Recently, hypoglycaemic eect was observed with leaf extract and seed oil in normal as well as alloxan-induced diabec rabbits (Ray et al., 1996).4.6.  Anulcer eectNeem leaf and bark aqueous extracts produce highly potent anacid secretory and anulcer acvity. A signicant anulcer eect was observed with nimbidin in prevenng acetylsalicylic acid, indomethacin, stress or serotonin-induced gastric lesions as well as histamine or cysteamine-induced duodenal ulcers
Anferlity eectNeem seed and leaf extract possess the chemical constuents which can act as an-ferlity sources. Studies on this concept have revealed that intra-vaginal applicaon of neem oil, can prevent  pregnancy,  thereby stang  it as  a  novel  method of  contracepon.  NIM- 76,  a rened product  from  neem oil,  was  studied  in  10 human  volunteers,  where  intra-vaginal applicaon  before sexual intercourse could prevent pregnancy with no adverse eect on vagina, cervix and uterus, further,  the  study  revealed that  intrauterine treatment  is safe. Aqueous  extracts  of seeds and leaves  contain sodium nimbinate  (triterpene)  which showed  anferlity acvity (Pillai et al., 1978; Sinha, 1984; Upadhyay et al., 1994).4.8.  Anmalarial acvityNeem  seed  and leaf  extracts  are effective  against  both chloroquin-resistant and sensive strain malarial  parasites. One of the neem’s components, “gedunin”  (a limonoid),  is as eecve as quinine against malaria. Malaria is one of the pandemic diseases  causing  millions of deaths every  year  in India and several other countries. China has adopted neem in a big way to reap the anmalarial eects of neem. The an-malarial formulaon “Quinahausa” prepared in China will be available in India as well. Neem oil treated mosquito nets and mosquito-repellent cheap tablets are also becoming popular, due  of  growing problems  of  resistance to  conventional treatments, it is becoming more and more dicult to control malaria.  Clinical  trials have  been conducted  to  check  the ecacy of neem extracts to control hyperlipidemia in a group of malarial paents severely infected with P. falciparum. The lipid level, especially cholesterol, was found to be lower during therapy when compared to non-malaria paents (Rochanakij et al., 1985; Mukherjee et al., 1999).4.9.  Anfungal acvityFrom me  immemorial it is believed that  Neem is eecve against  certain  fungi that  infect  the  human body.  Some important fungi against which neem preparaons have been found to  be eecve are:  athlete’s foot fungus that  infects hair, skin and  nails;  a ringworm that invades  both  skin and nails of the feet, fungus develops in intesnal tract, bronchi, lungs, and  mucous membranes and a fungus  that is part of the normal mucous ora that can get out of control leading to lesions  in  mouth (thrush), vagina,  etc.   Extracts of  neem leaf,  neem  oil seed  kernels  are effective  against certain fungi  including  Trichophyton,  Epidermophyton, Microspor, Trichosporon, Geotricum and Candida (Kalid et al., 1989)4.10.  Anbacterial acvityNeem  derives  compounds especially  Azadirachn is  well known  for  its role  as anbacterial  agent.  It is  a complex tetranorteiterpenoid limonoid present in the seeds as well as  leaves  which is  highly  responsible for  toxic  effect on microbes. (Quelemes et al., 2015; Gupta, et al., 2019). Extracts of the leaves,  seed and bark possesses  a  wide spectrum of anbacterial acon against Gram-negave and Gram-posive microorganisms, including M. tuberculosis and streptomycin resistant strains. In vitro, it inhibits Vibrio cholerae Klebsiella pneumoniae,  M.  tuberculosis  and M. pyogenes  (Khan and Wassilew, 1987). Anmicrobial eects of neem extract have been  demonstrated  against Streptococcus mutans  and S. faecalis (Chopra et al., 1952). Apart from azadirachn, other components such  as nimbidin, nimbin, nimbolide,  gedunin, mahmoodin, margolone, and cyclic trisulde contribute to the an-bacterial acvity of neem (Al Akeel et al., 2017; Heyman et al., 2017). Further, neem extracts are a ray of hope to cure deadly diseases  viz., Chagas disease in Lan America which was  uncontrolled  by  any  other means  of medicines. This disease is caused by a parasite which is carried by an insect called kissing bug. Research has shown that feeding neem to the bugs  not  only frees them  of  parasites, but azadirachn prevents the young insects from molng and the adults from reproducing. 4.11.  Anviral acvityAqueous leaf extract oers anviral acvity against Vaccinia virus, Chikungunya and measles virus (Rao et al., 1969; Baswa et al., 2001). Nimbin and nimbidin have been found to have anviral  acvity.  They  aect potato  virus X,  vaccinia virus, and fowl pox virus.4.12.  Ancancer acvityNeem  leaf  aqueous  extract  effectively suppresses  oral squamous cell carcinoma induced  by 7,  12-dimethylbenz[a] anthracene  (DMBA),  as revealed  by reduced  incidence of neoplasm  (Gogati  and Marathe,  1989).   Pramanik  et  al. (2016)  has  conducted a  study  in chemoprotective  neem compounds viz., azadirachn, nimbolide and limonoid enrich extracts  on  models of  buccal carcinogenesis in  hamsters. Overall studies were tested posive to reduce the expression and  cell  proliferaon  angens.  Further, researchers  have shown  prominent  an-cancerous  acvies from  limonoid-derived  compounds  from  neem.  Amongst  these,  both 1-O-deacetylohchinolide B  and 15-O-deacetylnimbolindin-B are proved  to be benecial to  hinder cell growth  in human cervical adenocarcinoma (Zhu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018). A very recent study discovered that alkaloid-derived limonoid, azadiramide-A,  is  primarily found  in Neem  leaf  ethanolic extracts, showed to stop cell growth and induce apoptosis in both the estrogen independent MDAMB-231 and estrogen dependent MCF-7 cell lines of breast cancer in human beings (Elumalai et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2017).4.13.  Anoxidant acvityThe  antioxidant  activity of  neem  seed extract  has  been demonstrated in vivo during horse- grain germinaon which is associated with low levels of lipooxygenase acvity and lipid peroxides (Balasenthil et al., 1999). An anoxidant principle has also been isolated, which is a potent inhibitor  of plant lipooxygenases. An-oxidants derived from  neem is simple and cost  eecve way to  supplement with natural extracts like  those  derived  from Neem,  in forms  such as  teas  and oils, seem to be a simple and cost-eecve way to introduce anoxidants (Alzohairy, 2016).
Anti-diabec eect Diabetes is one of the major chronic degenerave disorders now  the  world is  facing  (Joshi et  al.,  2010; Shori,  2012; Hieronymus and Grin, 2015). According to the health survey conservavely by 2030 there is expectancy for diabetes to be the 11th leading cause of death (Mathers and Loncar, 2006). Keeping in view of the severity of disease searching the ways for lower cost treatments must be need of hour. Among the various methods and pharmaco therapies being developed, the use of Neem extracts has steadily grown in interest (Joshi et al., 2010; Al Akeel et al., 2017).  Several studies carried out in induced-diabec  rat models have revealed  rescue of the G6PD when  treated  with Neem extracts (Basir  and Shailey, 2012; Upre et al., 2013).4.15.  Eect on central nervous systemVarying degrees of central nervous system (CNS) depressant acvity in mice was observed with the leaf extract (Rao et al., 1998). Fracons of acetone extract of leaf showed signicant CNS depressant acvity (Singh et al., 1987). Leaf extract up to a dose of 200 mg/kg body weight produces signicant anxiolyc acvity in rats (Singh et al., 1980). The crude ethanolic extracts of stem bark and root bark showed hypotensive, spasmolyc and diurec acvies (Bhakuni et al., 1971).4.16.  Other acvity The  gum  from  bark is  a smulant  and demulcent tonic.  It possesses an-leprosy,  anspirochaetal, and immenagogue properites.  Neem  is  widely used  for treang  fevers. It  has anti-pyretic  (fever-reducing)  property. Apart  from these benets, neem products also have analgesic (pain-relieving) and an-inammatroy eects, i.e. for most common ailments neem can  provide organic, cheap, easily available  and local medicines, thereby neem can bring sustainable livelihood to many people especially in rural and tribal regions.5.  ConclusionNeem  is one  the best  nontoxic  biological  sources for development  of  modem drugs.  Therefore,  wide variety of  neem  extracts  extend their  benets beyond  tradional medical  folklore,  hence  through the  use of  scienc  and technological  advance  now  we  can use  neem extracts as current medical adjuvants,  on  humans,  animals  and  plants by understanding  their potenal. Considering  the immense importance  of  this “Kalpavriksha”  it can  be  explored for economic  and  therapeutic  utilization  for a  sustainable development. 6.  ReferencesAl  Akeel,  R.,  Mateen,  A., Janardhan,  K., Gupta,  V.C., 2017. Analysis of  an-bacterial  