Muntingia calabura - L.

Summary

Calabura or Muntingia calabura is a fast-growing small shrub or tree that is the only species in Muntingia genus and native to Southern Mexico, the Caribbean, Central America, and western South America. It has a spreading crown, short bole of about 20 cm in diameter, and drooping branches. The flowers are small and white, and the fruits are edible, sweet, and juicy. The fruits can be processed into jams.Tea can be made from the leaves. The bark yields a tough fiber used to make ropes and baskets. The wood is a source of paper pulp. It is also used as fuel for cooking. Established plants are drought-resistant but not tolerant to strong winds. Propagation method is through air layering, seed sowing, and cuttings.

Physical Characteristics
 
Muntingia calabura is an evergreen Tree growing to 9 m (29ft) by 12 m (39ft) at a fast rate.
See above for USDA hardiness. It is hardy to UK zone 10. The flowers are pollinated by Bees. The plant is self-fertile.
It is noted for attracting wildlife.
Suitable for: light (sandy), medium (loamy) and heavy (clay) soils, prefers well-drained soil and can grow in nutritionally poor soil. Suitable pH: mildly acid, neutral and basic (mildly alkaline) soils and can grow in very acid and very alkaline soils.
It can grow in semi-shade (light woodland) or no shade. It prefers moist soil and can tolerate drought.

Synonyms

Muntingia rosea H.Karst.
Habitats

Edible Uses

Edible Parts: Fruit  Leaves
Edible Uses: Tea

Fruit - raw or cooked. A sweet juicy flesh, they are very good to eat out of hand and can also be used in jams, tarts, pies etc. The fruit is intensely, almost nauseatingly, sweet. The fruit is much loved by children. The fruit is about 12mm in diameter and has a high vitamin C content. A tea is made from the leaves.

Medicinal Uses

Plants For A Future can not take any responsibility for any adverse effects from the use of plants. Always seek advice from a professional before using a plant medicinally.
Antiseptic  Antispasmodic  Vitamin C

The flowers are said to possess antiseptic properties. An infusion of the flowers is valued as an antispasmodic[306 ,. It is taken to relieve headache and the first symptoms of a cold.