Jamaica Cherry/ Muntingia calabura

Also known as: Strawberry tree, Calabur tree, Ornamental cherry, Singapore cherry
Jamaica Cherry (Muntingia calabura) is a fruit tree native to Central America which has been introduced and become naturalized in South America, Southeast Asia, and India. It grows readily in poor soil conditions. The wood is used in construction and rope can be made from the bark. The fruit is edible and used to create many culinary products.

Care Guide for Jamaica Cherry 


Soil
Sand, Moderately acidic, Slightly acidic, Neutral, Slightly alkaline, Moderately alkaline

Sunlight
Full sun, Partial sun

Hardiness Zones
10 - 12


Common Pests & Diseases
Common issues for Jamaica Cherry based on 10 million real cases 

Nutrient deficiencies
A lack of nutrients will cause a widespread yellowing of the leaves. The yellowing may begin at the base or top of the plant.
Solutions: There are several easy ways to remedy the nutrient deficiencies in soils. Use a water-soluble fertilizer. Fertilizers will include most or all of the macro and micro-nutrients the plants need to thrive. 

Aged yellow and dry
Natural aging can cause leaves to turn yellow and dry out.
Solutions: If the yellowing and drying of leaves and flowers is a natural progression due to age, nothing can be done to slow or stop the process. Once hormones within the plant begin the process of senescence, it’s 

Fruit Spot
Pathogenic infections can cause spots (typically black or brown) to appear on the fruit.
Solutions: Prune regularly - prune as a preventative measure as well as to remove any plants and plant parts affected by fruit Spot.

Underwatering
A lack of water will cause the leaves to gradually turn yellow starting at the base of the branch while the entire plant appears to wilt.
Solutions: Your plant is very thirsty and needs water promptly. You can revive your plant by giving it water. The easiest technique is to slowly pour water into your plant’s soil so that the whole surface is moistened


Plant Type
Shrub

Bloom Time
Bloom Time
Spring, Summer, Fall

Leaf Color
Leaf Color
Green
Blue
