Muntingia calabura


Classifications and Characteristics
Plant Division - Angiosperms (Flowering Seed Plants) (Dicotyledon)
Plant Growth Form - Tree (Small (6m-15m))
Maximum Height - 3 m to 12 m

Biogeography
Native Distribution - Tropical America
Preferred Climate Zone - Tropical

Description and Ethnobotany
Others - Plant Morphology - A small tree of 3-12m in height, which has fan-like branches and is droopy, thus resulting in it’s tiered tree form. Leaves are evergreen of about 4-14cm long and 1-4cm wide. Leaves are simple, ovate-lanceolate, dark-green and minutely hairy on the upper side, asymmetry of leaf blade base, and leaf margin serrate. Flowers have white petals and are 1.25-2cm wide with 5 green sepals, 5 white petals and many prominent yellow stamens.Fruits are 1-1.25cm in diameter, with red or sometimes orangey-yellow smooth skin. Several thousands tiny seeds are found in the soft pulp, but are too fine to be noticed when eating. It is able to thrive in both acid and alkaline conditions, and is drought-resistant but not salt tolerant.
Ethnobotanical Uses - Edible Plant Parts (Edible Fruits)

Food (Fruit & Vegetable)
[Others]: The sapwood is yellowish, compact, fine-grained, and can be easily used for general carpentry. It is also a potential source for fuel as it ignites quickly upon being burnt, with intense heat and gives off little smoke. Fruits are well-like by children. It tastes sweet and is similar to the taste of cotton candy. Bats are also attracted to the fruits. Fruits can also be made into jam and cooked in tarts. Flower infusions have antispasmodic values and are taken to relieve headaches or the very first symptoms of a cold.

Landscaping Features
Plant & Rootzone Preference - Tolerance - Acidic (low pH) Soils, Alkaline high pH Soils
Thematic Landscaping - Economic Garden, Naturalistic Garden
Fauna, Pollination and Dispersal
Fauna Pollination Dispersal Associated Fauna - Bee-Attracting

Plant Care and Propagation
Light Preference - Full Sun
Water Preference - Moderate Water
Plant Growth Rate - Moderate

Foliar
Mature Foliage Colour(s) - Green
Mature Foliage Texture(s) - Hairy / Hirsute
Foliar Arrangement Along Stem - Alternate

Floral (Angiosperm)
Flower Colour(s) - White
Fruit, Seed and Spore
Mature Fruit Colour(s) - Angiosperms and Gymnosperms - Red