An Overview on Phytochemistry, Pharmacology, and Traditional aspects of Muntingia calabura

ABSTRACT:

Muntingia, or Jamaica Cherry, is a small, rapidly growing tree at full maturity that can reach up to 40 ft tall. The soft leaves are evergreen, with alternative phyllotaxy. The leaves on top are dark green and underneath are light green. The small, white flowers are centered with yellow stamens. The small, round fruits are abundant, and have a red or yellow color depending on the variety. The fruits are raw edible or made into jam. The fruit had a potent anti-inflammatory action. The flowers, made into medicinal teas, are antiseptic and antispasmodic. The Muntingia calabura (M. Calabura) leaves exhibited anti-proliferative and antioxidant potential activities. The present Muntingia research is to provide a description of the common applications and pharmacological potential. In conclusion, this review is hoped to serve as an incentive for others to further explore the pharmacological potential of M. calabura is designed to develop as a new therapeutic agent.

INTRODUCTION:

The concept of ethnopharmacology was first defined in the 1960s, describing an approach to the discovery of single biologically active molecules used since the first compounds were isolated from plant material. It should also be noted that the discovery of new drugs could be derived from a wider use of plants than purely for medical purposes. Thus, materials used as poisons, in pest control, in agriculture, as cosmetics, in processes of fermentation and for religious purposes could also yield active substances that can be exploited as leads for drug development.

 

However, article simply describes traditional Bangladesh plants and their use due to the greater interest of the general population, surprisingly, about 80 percent of the population of developing countries (according to WHO) are now partially or completely dependent on primary health care herbal drugs.

 

It should be remembered that since the ingredients used are herbal, there are chances of side effects not only that the ingredients have often added benefits that overall improve your health. The World Health Organisation (WHO) reports that for their primary health care needs, approximately 80 per cent of the people living in developed countries relies almost entirely on western medicine. The medicinal plants play a major role in almost all of the traditional medical systems and constitute their backbone. Indian materia medica comprises around 2000 naturally occurring medicines nearly all of which are obtained from numerous traditional system and folklore systems. These traditional medicinal products, 400 are of mineral and animal origin while the rest are of vegetable origin. India has a rich heritage of traditional medicine and the traditional health care system has been flourishing in many countries. Most recently, there has been interest in other products from traditional system of medicine Artemisinin is an active antimalarial compound isolated from Artimisia annua, a constituent of the Chinese antimalarial preparation Qinghaosu and forskolin was isolated from Coleus forskohlii, a species used in ayurvedic preparation for cardiac disorders. Artemether has recently been introduced as a new standardized preparation for the treatment of drug-resistant malaria, and new forskolin analogues are being tested for a variety of uses. A significant part of healthcare is traditional medicine. Population in developing countries is largely dependent on traditional indigenous medicine for their primary healthcare needs. However, conventional drugs have not been adopted into most national health programs, and the ability of the conventional practitioners is far from being completely exploited. Herbal drugs are of considerable impotence to the health of individuals and populations but they need to improve their quality control. The use of herbal medicine has increased during the last decade. Therefore there has been a rise in traditional tread of herbal remedies and other forms of natural remedies. Therefore the proper use of these various types of medicines has become a concern. In recent years, the use of herbal medicines worldwide has provided an excellent opportunity to India to look for therapeutic lead compounds from an ancient system of therapy, i.e. Ayurveda, which can be utilized for development of new drug. More than 50percent of all modern drugs are of natural product origin and play an important role in the pharmaceutical industry's drug development programs. A large number of medicinal plants, however, remain to be researched for their potential pharmacological value. One of the plants that has recently gained a medicinal plant status is Muntingia calabura L. (Elaeocarpaceae). Muntingia calabura is known throughout the world as ‘‘Jamaican cherry’’ and in Malaysia, particularly among the Malay, it is known as ‘‘kerukup siam’’. Being the sole species within the genus Muntingia, it is native to southern Mexico, tropical South America, Central America, the Greater Antilles, Trinidad, and St. Vincent. It is also widely cultivated in warm areas in India and Southeast Asia such as Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Indeed, in Malaysia, M. calabura is commonly cultivated as roadside trees. The common name is Calabura, Panama berry, Capulin. Calabura or Muntingia calabura is a fast-growing small shrub or tree that is the only species in Muntingia genus and native to Southern Mexico, the Caribbean, Central America, and western South America. It has a spreading crown, short bole of about 20cm in diameter, and drooping branches. The flowers are small and white, and the fruits are edible, sweet, and juicy. The fruits can be processed into jams. Tea can be made from the leaves. The bark yields a tough fiber used to make ropes and baskets. The wood is a source of paper pulp. It is also used as fuel for cooking. Established plants are drought-resistant but not tolerant to strong winds. Propagation method is through air layering, seed sowing, and cuttings.

 

Cherry leaves (Muntingia calabura) contains antioxidants that generally form by phenolic or pholifenols, the sinamat acid derivatives, flavonoids, tocopherols, coumarin and polifungsional acids. Flavonoids that have an antioxidant activity consist of flavonol, flavanon, flavones, isoflavones, catechins and kalkon. Phenolic compounds that have antioxidant activity can be known through the way of extraction. Extractions are a way to isolate a target material when combined with certain substances. The mixture comes into contact with a solvent where the substance of interest is soluble, but the remaining substances are insoluble. Components of active compounds can be extracted from plants or animals on the basis of "Like dissolved like theory," compounds are extracted depending on the solubility.

Systemic Classification:
Kingdom: Plantae
Order: Malvales
Family: Muntingiaceae
Genus: Muntingia L.
Species: M. calabura

 

General History:

Muntingia, also known as Jamaica Cherry, is widely grown in the tropics and subtropics worldwide. By the early 1900s, Muntingia was popular in Southeast Asia, and in 1922, the USDA introduced several trees to Hawaii, USA. In 1926, Dr. David Fairchild collected seeds from a yellow fruit variety in Ceylon, and by the 1930s, Muntingia could be found in home gardens throughout south Florida. Today, Muntingia is very popular throughout Southeast Asia, especially in the Philippines, but is not very widespread in south Florida7.

 

Physical Characteristics:

Muntingia calabura is an evergreen Tree growing to 9m (29ft) by 12m (39ft) at a fast rate. It is hardy to zone (UK) 10. The flowers are pollinated by Bees. The plant is self-fertile. It is noted for attracting wildlife. Suitable for: light (sandy), medium (loamy) and heavy (clay) soils, prefers well-drained soil and can grow in nutritionally poor soil. Suitable pH: acid, neutral and basic (alkaline) soils and can grow in very acid and very alkaline soils. It can grow in semi-shade (light woodland) or no shade. It prefers moist soil and can tolerate drought. The fruits are sold in Mexican markets. They are considered too small in Brazil to be of economic importance so it is proposed that the tree be planted on the banks of the river so that the excess of flowers and fruits dropping into the water can serve as bait, attracting fish for the benefit of fishermen. The tree is considered a nuisance in the home garden in Malaya because fruit-bats consume the fruits and then spend the day under the eaves of houses, disfiguring the porch and terrace with their pink, seedy droppings.

 

Cultivation details:

A plant of the lowland tropics, where it is found at elevations up to 1,000 metres. It grows best in areas where annual daytime temperatures are within the range 22-32°C, but can tolerate 10 - 36°C. It prefers a mean annual rainfall in the range 1,400 - 2,000mm, but tolerates 1,000 - 2,400mm. Probably tolerant of most soil types. The tree has the reputation of thriving with no care in poor soils and it does well in both acid and alkaline soils and even on old tin tailings. Prefers a pH in the range 5.5-6.5, tolerating 5-7. Established plants are drought resistant. The plant requires a sheltered position, the wide-spread branches tend to break in high winds. The tree is often cultivated as an ornamental and shade tree. This tree has spread to many areas of the tropics with its capacity to colonize disturbed land, including on well-trodden land where other trees cannot be founded. In certain areas it has been invasive. Because of their rapid growth seedlings flower within two years. Fruit straight away from air-layered plants. The plant can establish itself in trodden yards and along shop fronts where no other tree takes root, and it can also withstand the air pollution in city streets. Flowering Time: Blooms all year. Bloom Color: White/Near White.

Propagation:

Seed - The seed needs light to germinate. New seed germination is facilitated by movement through the digestive system of bats and birds. The seed is well distributed in forest soil seed banks, which needs high temperature which light germination conditions. The seedlings tolerate no shade. Planters use fresh seeds to sow directly into the field, mixed with the fruit 's sweet juice. Water is repeatedly added to the squeezed-out seeds and juice to prepare seeds for planting, and when the seeds fall to the bottom of the pot the water is drained out several times before the seeds are clean enough. They get dry in the shade afterwards.

Chemical Constituents of M. calabura:

Since 1991 to date, several phytochemical constituents have been isolated from different parts of M. calabura. Reported on the isolation of 12 flavonoids from methanol extract of M. calabura roots (MEMCR) namely (2S)-5ʹ-hydroxy-7,3ʹ,4ʹ- 7 trimethoxyflavan, (2S)-7,8,3ʹ,4ʹ,5ʹ-pentamethoxyflavan, (2S)-2ʹ-hydroxy- 7,8,3ʹ,4ʹ,5ʹ- pentamethoxyflavan, (2S)-5ʹ-hydroxy-7,8,3ʹ,4ʹ-tetramethoxyflavan, (2S)-8-hydroxy-7,3ʹ,4ʹ,5ʹ-tetramethoxyflavan, (2S)-8,2ʹ-dihydroxy-7,3ʹ,4ʹ,5ʹ- tetramethoxyflavan, (2S)-8,5ʹ-dihydroxy-7,3ʹ,4ʹ-trimethoxyflavan, 7,8,3ʹ,4ʹ,5ʹ- pentamethoxyflavone, (M),(2S),(2ʹʹS)-,(P),(2S),(2ʹʹS)-8,8ʹʹ-5ʹ-trihydroxy-7,7ʹ-3ʹ,3ʹʹʹ- 4ʹ,4ʹʹʹ-5ʹʹʹ-heptamethoxy-5,5ʹʹ-biflavan, 5ʹ-hydroxy-7,8,3ʹ4ʹ-tetramethoxyflavone, (M),(2S),(2ʹʹS)-,(P),(2S),(2ʹʹS)-8,8ʹʹ-5ʹ-5ʹʹʹ-tetrahydroxy-7ʹ,7ʹʹ-3ʹ,3ʹʹʹ-4ʹ,4ʹʹʹ hexamethoxy- 5ʹ,5ʹʹʹ-biflavan and 8,5ʹ-dihydroxy-7,3ʹ,4ʹ-trimethoxyflavone8.

 

Pharmacological Activities of M. calabura:

Acute toxicity:

Despite the first report on the pharmacological activity of M. calabura published in 1991, the first attempt to determine the plant acute toxicity was published only in 20119. The acute oral toxicity was determined on M. calabura leaves collected from the Station Ghanpur, Warangal, Andhra Pradesh, India. The methanol extract of the leaves was given orally to rats in doses ranging from 300, 500 and 2000mg/kg. Signs of toxicity were observed for the first 2–3hours following extract administration, followed by observations on the percentage of mortality starting from 24 h to 14 days. The results obtained showed no sign of toxicity and no mortality was recorded up to the dose of 2000mg/kg of extract. Another attempt to study the acute toxicity of M. calabura leaves, collected in Selangor, Malaysia, was carried out by Ibrahim et al., 201210.

 

Cytotoxic activity:

The first attempt to study the cytotoxic activity of M. calabura was performed using the roots of the plant collected in Sarabuti Province, Thailand11. The methanol extract of the roots was first subjected to the isolation of bioactive compounds and then tested against BC1 (human breast cancer), HT-1080 (human fibrosarcoma), Lu1 (human lung cancer), Me12 (human melanoma), Co12 (human colon cancer), KB (human nasopharyngeal carcinoma), KB-V (vincristine-resistant KB), and P-388 (murine lymphocytic leukemia) cell lines. Twelve compounds were isolated from MEMCR, namely, seven flavans (compounds 1–7), three flavones (compounds 8, 10, and 12), and two biflavans (compounds 9 and 11). Of all the isolated compounds, only compound 8 was not tested against all cell lines. Compounds 1–7 and 9–12 exerted cytotoxicity activity against P-388 cells with the ED50 values ranging between 2.0 and 16.7mg/mL. As for KB and KB-V cells, the cytotoxic effect was shown by all compounds except for compounds 10 and 12, while compounds 6, 10, and 12 with the recorded ED50 ranging between 2.2–15.5 and 2.1–13.3mg/mL, respectively. As for BC-1, HT-1080, and Lu-1, only compounds 3, 9, and 11, respectively, caused cyotoxic effect with the recorded ED50 ranging among 10.9–16.0, 3.3–5.5, and 13.5–15.6mg/mL, respectively. In addition, all compounds, except for 10 and 12, exerted a cytotoxic effect against ME-12 cells with the recorded ED50 ranging between 8.7 and 14.6mg/mL. Lastly, all compounds, except for 1 and 4–7, exerted cytotoxic effect against the CO-12 with recorded ED50 ranging between 5.9 and 15.8mg/mL.

 

Antioxidant activity:

The increase of endothelial function, artery function, and insulin sensitivity; as well as attenuation of platelet reactivity and decrease of blood pressure. Moreover proper scientific screening of potential bio actives of these plants followed by chemical investigations is necessary to make these herbal remedies more viable. In this context, the present study was undertaken to evaluate the antioxidant of Muntingia calabura (raw fruit).

Antibacterial activity:

The first attempt to study the antibacterial activity of M. calabura was carried out by using the leaves and fruits collected in the State of Puebla and State of Veracruz, Mexico. Diluted in 100mg/mL of DMSO concentration, the MEMCL and methanol extract of M. calabura fruit (MEMCFr) were subjected to repeat serial dilutions and then tested against Escherichia coli (C600) and Staphylococcus aureus (209 P) using the micro-dilution assay. Both MEMCL and MEMCFr exhibited antibacterial activity against E. coli and S. aureus with the recorded MIC of 512 and 1024mg/mL, and 128 and 256mg/mL, respectively. This was followed by another antibacterial activity report by Zakaria et al. (2007b)12, who studied the antibacterial properties of MEMCL, aqueous (AEMCL), and chloroform (CEMCL) extract of M. calabura leaves, collected from Shah Alam Selangor, Malaysia, between January and February 2005. These extracts, prepared at various concentrations (10000, 40 000, 70000 and 100000ppm), were tested against Corneybacterium diphtheria, S. aureus, Bacillus cereus, Proteus vulgaris, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Kosuriarhizophila, Shigellaflexneri, E. coli, Aeromonashydrophila, and Salmonella typhi using the in vitro disc diffusion method. The results showed that CEMCL was less effective as compared with the AEMCL and MEMCL. At all concentrations tested, AEMCL inhibited the growth of S. aureus and K. rhizophila while MEMCL exerted antibacterial activity against S. flexneri, B, cereus, S. aureus, P. vulgaris, A. hydrophila, and K. rhizophila.

 

Insecticidal activity:

Only one study concerned insecticidal activity investigation of M. Calabura was recorded from the Universidade Rural Federal de Pernambuco (UFRPE), Recife, Brazil, using flowers and fruit collected. The authors prepared two types of extracts from M. calabura flowers and fruits, namely ethanol extracts [flowers (EEMCFl) and fruits (EEMCFr)], and hexane extracts [flowers (HEMCFl) and fruits (HEMCFr)], at concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 30.0mg/mL, and tested them against Plutellaxylostella larvae and pupae using leaf disc immersion assay. All extracts were reported to be toxic to the larvae and pupae of P. xylostella. Moreover, the EEMCFl and EEMCFr were the most toxic against first instar P. xylostella larvae with the recorded LC50 of 0.61mg/mL and 1.63mg/mL, respectively. This is followed by the HEMCFr (LC50¼5.5mg/mL) and HEMCFl (LC50¼18.9mg/mL). When comparing their relative toxicities, it is worth highlighting that EEMCFl was 31.0-foldmore toxic than HEMCFl, and 4.2 - and 8.9-fold more toxic than EEMCFr and HEMCFr, respectively. Overall, theseextracts were more effective than cordycepin, the reference drug, which produced 100% mortality only at 500mg/mL in 72 h12.

 

Anti-nociceptive activity:

The antinociceptive activity of M. calabura leaves was released. This time, the leaves were collected between July and August, 2005 from Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia, and prepared as CEMCL, in the concentrations of 10, 50, and 100% strength. CEMCL was tested for its antinociceptive activity using the abdominal constriction test, the hot plate test, and the formalin test. In the abdominal constriction test, the extract exhibited a concentration-dependent activity with CEMCL at the highest concentration producing 495% analgesia while CEMCL at 50% concentration produced an activity that was equieffective to that of 100mg/kg ASA (the reference drug). The extract also exerted an antinociceptive effect, but in a concentration-independent manner, when assessed using the hot plate test with the onset of activity depending on the concentration of CEMCL. However, the activity of CEMCL was overshadowed by the activity of 5mg/kg morphine at all concentrations used. When tested using the formalin test, which was used in both early and late phases of the test, the extract also demonstrated antinociceptive behavior. However, the concentration-dependent activity by CEMCL was observed only in the early phase of the formalin test. The reference drugs used in the formalin test were 5mg/kg morphine for the early and late phase, and 100mg/kg ASA, for the late phase13.

 

Anti-inflammatory activity:

The leaves were prepared as CEMCL at 10, 50, and 100 percent concentrations and tested using the paw edema procedure caused by carrageenan. The reference drug ASA (100mg/kg) was used. Both CEMCL concentrations exerted an incoherent anti-inflammatory activity which was less effective than the ASA. The study was also released on the anti-inflammatory function of M calabura leaves when attempting to establish AEMCL's antinociceptive activity. For this analysis, AEMCL was prepared at 10, 50, and 100 percent concentrations (equivalent to 27, 135, and 270 mg/kg, respectively) and subjected to carrageen-induced paw edema assay. The findings obtained showed that the extract displayed anti-inflammatory activity which was independent of concentration. The 10 percent and 50 percent AEMCL anti-inflammatory activity was absolutely lost after 7 h of its administration while the 100percent AEMCL anti-inflammatory activity was lost after just 6 h of its administration. It is worth mentioning that the anti-inflammatory activity of AEMCL, at the concentrations of 10 and 50%, was significantly greater than the reference drug, 100mg/kg ASA, at the interval of 3 and 4 h after their administration. In the recent attempt to study the pharmacological properties of the fruits of M. calabura, the MEMCFr and AEMCFr were prepared in doses of 200 and 400mg/kg and tested using the carrageenan-induced paw edema test. The results obtained established that both extracts exerted dose-dependent inhibition of carrageenan induced localized edema at 4 h after the administration of extracts. The significant anti-inflammatory activity was recorded at 24.5 and 44.2% for both doses of MEMCFr and at 20.4 and 46.2% for both doses of AEMCFr. Indomethacin, in the dose of 10mg/kg, was used as the reference drug and caused 84.3% inhibition of carrageenan-induced edema formation in comparison with the extracts14.

 

Antipyretic activity:

The first attempt to determine the antipyretic potential of M. calabura was made by using the leaves that was prepared as CEMCL. The sample, at the concentrations of 10, 50, and 100 percent, was tested using Brewer's yeast (BY)-induced pyrexia assay. The extract displayed an antipyretic activity independent of the concentration. Comparison made as the reference drug against the 100 mg/kg ASA has shown that the antipyretic activity of CEMCL is less effective than the drug. Another report on the antipyretic activity of another M calabura extract, namely AEMCL, while studying the anti-inflammatory and antinoceptive activities. After 240min of their administration the AEMCL exercised a concentration-independent antipyretic action with the onset of effects of 27 and 135mg/kg AEMCL was reported. Overall, the antipyretic activity of AEMCL was less effective than the reference drug, 100mg/kg ASA15.

 

Antiulcer activity:

The investigation of antiulcer potential of M. calabura was initiated with one study. This preliminary study was carried out by involving the use of M. calabura leaves obtained from a company, Ethno Resources Sdn. Bhd., Selangor, Malaysia. The leaves were prepared as EEMCL, in the dose of 250 and 500mg/kg, and assayed only against the ethanol-induced gastric ulcer model. The extract demonstrated significant and dose-dependent antiulcer activity indicated by the reduction in the areas of gastric ulcer injuries (112.5±2.11 and 95.08±2.18mm2) in comparison with the negative control group (735.25±2.12mm2) and 20mg/kg omeprazole-treated group (the reference drug; 90.33±2.02mm2). More analysis on the ethanol-treated stomach samples showed that the EEMCL decreases gastric substance acidity as increasing gastric mucosa mucus development as opposed to negative regulation. The macroscopic findings were further supported by subsequent microscopic observations. Another research on the antiulcer capacity of M. calabura leaves are examined. In this study, the leaves were prepared as MEMCL and subjected to ethanol- and indomethacin-induced gastric ulcers in which the doses 25, 50, 100, 250, and 500mg/kg were used in the former assay, while the doses 100, 250, and 500mg/kg were used in the later assay. The difference in the number of doses used was due to early observations using the gastric ulcer model caused by ethanol in which the extract exercised a dose-independent antiulcer operation. Therefore a further study was performed using lower doses (25 and 50mg/ kg). Moreover, the role of NO and sulfhydryl groups in mediating the antiulcer activity of MEMCL was also investigated using the ethanol-induced gastric ulcer. From the results obtained, MEMCL, at all doses tested, exhibited a significant and dose-dependent reduction of ethanol-induced gastric ulcer formation with the percentage of antiulcer ranging between 63 and 95% in comparison with the reference drug, 100mg/kg ranitidine, that produced 70% protection. Furthermore, all doses of MEMCL exerted substantial and dose-dependent inhibition of indomethacin-induced gastric ulcer development with safety varying from 47 to 69 per cent. In contrast, 100mg/kg ranitidine demonstrated 78 percent antiulcer activity. Histopathological assessment showed the ability of the extract to reverse the toxic effect of ethanol and indomethacin, and restored the stomach to almost natural mucosal architecture similar to ranitidine safety. Moreover, pre-treatment with 70 mg/ kg L-NAME significantly worsened the gastric ulcers in MEMCL and 100mg/kg carbenoxolone-treated groups and this unwanted effect of L-NAME was reversed by 200mg/kg L-arginine. These findings indicate the participation of NO in the antiulcer potential exerted by MEMCL. Pre-treatment with 10mg/kg NEM, in contrast, significantly reversed the antiulcer activity of MEMCL and increased the gastric ulcer formation in comparison with saline pretreated group that is also receiving MEMCL. These findings indicate the participation of endogenous sulfhydryl compounds in the gastroprotective activity demonstrated by MEMCL.

 

Cardioprotective activity:

Only one report was published on the cardioprotective potential of M. calabura leaves by Nivethetha et al., 2009. Using the AEMCL, of which the location and period of leaves collection were not given, The authors studied the ability of an extract to attenuate myocardial infarction caused by isoproterenol in rats. Several parameters (e.g., aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and creatinine phosphokinase (CK)) were measured in both serum and heart tissue, as well as serum uric acid rats. From the findings obtained, AEMCL resulted in a substantial reduction in marker enzyme activity (AST, ALT, CK, and LDH) and uric acid levels relative to the myocardial infarction group induced by isoproterenol. Only 200 and 300mg/kg of AEMCL exerted significant effects in all parameters estimated16.

 

Antidiabetic activity:

The first report on antidiabetic activity of the leaves of M. calabura was published in 2011. The leaves of M. calabura, collected from Station Ghanpur, Warangal, Andhra Pradesh, India, were prepared as MEMCL, in doses of 300 and 500mg/kg, and subjected to the antidiabetic studies. Firstly, the serum glucose level was observed at 2, 4, 6, and 8 h after the administration of the extract. The findings revealed that both MEMCL doses induced major hypoglycemic effects in the normal fasted rats after 6 and 4–8 h, respectively. MEMCL's 500mg/ kg caused a significant reduction in blood glucose levels at the end of the 6 h from 83.19mg/dL at 0 h to 62.62 mg/dL (24.81 per cent). In comparison, the reference drug, 5mg/kg glipizide, caused significant reduction in the blood glucose level after 2 h of administration that lasted for another 6 h. In the second study, the effect of 500mg/kg MEMCL on the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was also investigated. The results showed that pre-treatment with 500mg/kg MEMCL caused significant reduction in the rise of blood glucose at 1 h interval (116.46±6.94mg/dL) when compared with the control group pre-treated with 5% gum acacia, which showed a rapid increase of blood glucose (144.73±7.86 mg/dL). At the end of 1 h interval (72,09±2,98mg/dL) the glucose levels reached the fasting values for the standard group (glipizide 5mg/kg). The 500mg/kg MEMCL was subjected to alloxane-induced diabetic assay in the third study. Following the experiments, 500 mg/kg of MEMCL significantly reduced the alloxan-induced hyperglycemia with maximum effect observed at 6 h (27%) in comparison with the reference drug, 5 mg/kg glipizide, which produced 37% reduction in blood glucose level16.

 

CONCLUSION:

As indicated by the increase in publications on the pharmacological potential of various traditionally claimed or newly discovered medicinal plants, current attention to the pharmacological potential of medicinal plants has been escalating globally. In an attempt to find plant lead pure and effective. It is worth mentioning that according to the WHO, a medicinal plant is any plant which, in one or more of its parts, contains substances that can be used for therapeutic purposes, or which are precursors for semisynthesis of chemo-pharmaceutical. Such a plant will have its parts including leaves, flowers, stems, barks, roots, rhizomes, fruits, grains or seeds, employed in the control or treatment of a disease condition and, therefore, contains chemical components that are medically active. Regard of M. calabura, all parts of the plant, namely the leaves, fruits, flowers, stem bark, bark, and roots have been used traditionally to treat various ailments. Moreover, the pharmacological potential of those isolated bioactive compounds and their contribution towards the claimed medicinal uses are not fully studied. So searching for bioactive compounds from M. calabura remains unsettled, with specific pharmacological activity. In addition, this analysis is hoped to act as an inspiration to others to further investigate M's pharmacological abilities. Calabura designed to develop it as a new therapeutic agent.