Morphological features, phytochemical and ethnopharmacological attributes of Tabernaemontana divaricata Linn.: A comprehensive review

Phytochemical Components
Phytochemical study of the plant revealed that the plant parts
contains high amount of various phytochemicals, and
bioactive substances. These are alkaloids, terpenoids, steroids,
flavonoids, phenypropanoids, phenolic acids, saponins,
tannins, proteins, cardiac glycosidase, carbohydrates and
several plant enzymes [9]. The plant ethanolic extracts showed
the rich amount of flavonoids and protein presence. As well
as in leaves amount of phenols were observed very high. In
leaves total flavonoids was assessed as 19.6 mg quercetin
equivalents/g (mg QE/g), total phenols was estimated 47.1mg
Gallic acid equivalents/g (mg GAE/g) and total protein level
was estimated 18 mg/g. In flower flavonoids was assessed
15.4 mg QE/g, total phenols was estimated 6.2 mgGallic acid
equivalents/g (mg GAE/g) and total protein level was
estimated 2 mg/g [1]. The flowers of the plant contain
apparicine, isovoacangine, isovoacristine, 11-methoxy-N-
methyl dihydro-Pericyclivine, tabernaemontanine,
tabersonine, voaphylline, N-1-methyl-Voaphylline and
vobasine. Huge amount of both primary (amino acids,
proteins, sugars and chlorophyll) and secondary metabolites
(phenols, alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, tannins, saponins
and glycosides) are present in the plant parts of
Tabernaemontana divaricata [10-17].
Ethnomedicinal Uses
Tabernaemontana divaricata is a useful and remarkable
medicinal shrub which is used as a traditional medicinal plant
in ayurvedic, homeopathy and folkloric treatment system for
different human ailments healing purposes in various parts of
the world. Many parts of this medicinal plant are applied in
the treatment of multiple diseases such as asthma, diarrhea,
epilepsy, abdominal tumors, eye infections, fever, fractures,
headache, inflammation, leprosy, edema, paralysis, piles,
rabies, rheumatic pain, ulceration and skin diseases [6]. Also
the plant is used as anti-hypertensive, aphrodisiac, diuretic,
anthelmintic, hair growth promoter, purgative, and remedy
against poisons and tonic for brain, liver and spleen [6].
In Thai, Ayurvedic and Chinese traditional medicines system
the plant is used for fever, pain, dysentery [18, 19]. While, in
Africa, from the roots extraction, latex from fruits or crushed
leaves are used as remedy for headache, constipation,
flatulence and stomach ache [18, 20]. Also the mixture of leaf
powder with other species is soaked in water and used to cure
bewitched persons or consumed daily to revive appetite [11]. In
Malaysia, decoction of bark from the plant is used to treat
syphilis, whilst the steam from boiled juice is inhaled to treat
ulceration of the nose [19].
The roots are prepared as decoction and used orally for
treatment of fever as well as the plant paste applied to cure
orchitis [18, 21]. In Bangladesh, the leaves of the plant are used
to treat tumors [22]. The leaves extracts is applied in the
treatment of sores [18]. As the plant Tabernaemontana
divaricata is found throughout the temperate and tropical
regions of India, America, Thailand and so many places in the
world, the different plant parts are used different traditional
way to cure several disease.
Pharmacological Activities
Antioxidant Activity
Various scientists reported the antioxidant effects of
Tabernaemontana divaricata by using the carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced hepato-toxicity model [23-25]. The
hepato-toxicity is because of the metabolite of CCl4, a free
extreme that causes the per-oxidation of lipids in the
endoplasmic reticulum that prompts cell passing [26].
In an in vivo study, Gupta et al. reported that methanolic
leaves extract of Tabernaemontana divaricata showed a
significant hepato-protective effect. Where lipid per-oxidation
is decreasing and significantly the level of anti-oxidant agents
were increasing in a dose dependent manner such as
glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase
(CAT) [23, 24].
In another investigation, Mandal and Mukherji demonstrated
that the plant is one of the best scavenging system to fight
against the effects of air pollution. Their result concluded that
the plant Tabernaemontana divaricata have a high range of
activity of antioxidant agents such as CAT, SOD, GSH,
phenolic peroxidase and ascorbate peroxidase [24].
Anti-analgesic Activity
In folk medicine, the analgesic properties of
Tabernaemontana divaricata are previously reported by using
roots. The anti-nociceptive effect is confirmed by the
experiment of Henriques et al. They showed that mice treated
either orally or intraperitoneally with150 mg/kg of
Tabernaemontana divaricata and 30 min before it is placed
on a heated plate (50-55 oC). Then the result showed
significantly greater response times to the heat stimulus than
the control that is without plant extracts treatment. But this
analgesic effect has not been verified for this mechanism [27].
Anti-inflammatory Activity
In case of rats, the anti-inflammatory effect of
Tabernaemontana divaricata was showed in carageenin-
induced paw edema [28-31]. In this experiment, male rats were
treated by injecting 0.1 ml of carageenin into one of the hind
paws. The plant decoctions (150-200 mg/kg) were executed
either orally or intra-peritoneally 1 h before the sub-plantar
infusion of carageenin. After carageenin injection, by using a
modified the edema measurements were done in 1, 2 and 4h.
This experiment reported that compared to animals without
extract administration, the plant extracts had significant anti-
inflammatory effect on carageenin-induced paw oedema and
this anti-inflammatory effect was dose dependent [26].
Tabernaemontana divaricata has very potent for the anti-
inflammatory mechanism because the presence of the
chemical agent, phenolic acid that has a potential anti-
inflammatory benefits [32].
Anti-microbial Activity
The anti-microbial effect of Tabernaemontana divaricata
shows against various infectious diseases such as syphilis,
leprosy, gonorrhea, dysentery, diarrhea, and malaria. An in
vitro study reported that at the concentration of 250 μg/ml of
apparicine, an alkaloid can inhibit the activity of Polio III
virus [33, 34]. Also, in an in vitro study it was shown that
apparicine at a concentration of 1.2 percent can exhibited
antimicrobial activity against Salmonella, Shigella,
Pseudomonas, Escherichia, Proteus, Staphylococcus and
Corynebacterium. Moreover, apparicine, acts as anopioid
agonist to opioid receptorsin an in vitro study [35, 36].
Another experiment demonstrated that voacamine has a
strong antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive bacteria
such as Staphylococus aureus and Bacillus subtilis. It also has
moderate activity against Gram-negative bacteria such as
Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa [23].
Gastro-protective Effect
The methanolic (TDFME 500 mg/kg, p.o) extracts of the
flower of Tabernaemontana divaricata plant showed anti-
ulcer property or gastro-protective effect in Wistar rats by
pyloric ligation induced gastric ulceration model using
Omeprazole (8mg/kg, p.o) as a standard drug. There are five
parameters volume of gastric juice, pH, free and total acidities
and ulcer index were evaluated. In this experiment the test
extract diminished volume of gastric juice, free and absolute
acridities and ulcer file.Also the raised pH of gastric acid
increased, like standard. The tests were 89.84% and 79.53%,
respectively and the observed percentage protection for
standard. Therefore in case of TDFME 500 mg/kg all the
parameters had positive effect and the standard also shows
similar result. In the present study it was concluded
Tabernaemontana divaricata flower methanolic extract
possesses ulcer preventive properties that means the plant had
significant gastro-protective effect at a dose of 500 mg/kg. In
this scenario further experimental operations are also
recommended to know the mechanism of action [6].
~ 34 ~
Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry http://www.phytojournal.com
Antifungal Activity
To evaluate the antifungal activity Tabernaemontana
divaricata petroleum ether, chloroform and ethanolic extracts
of the plant were tested by the cup plate method. In this case
different concentrations of the extracts (5%, 10%, 15%, and
20%) were arranged for test. With nutrient agar medium, all
the petriplates were poured and keep the petriplates for
solidification. For this test Aspergillus niger and Candida
albicans microorganisms were used and swabbed on the
petriplate containing media. Using cork borer the four wells
were prepared. Different concentrations of the sample were
filled in these wells. Then at 280°C for 48 h all the plates’
standard and control Flucanazole and DMF were incubated.
As a result, against Aspergillus niger and Candida albicans
the plant extracts carried out the antifungal activity. So in all
the concentration the ethanol extract showed maximum
inhibition zone, where the chloroform and petroleum ether
extract resulted potent antifungal activity [37].
Anti-diabetic Activity
The present experiment was demonstrated to evaluate the
anti-diabetic activity of the methanolic extract of leaves of
Tabernaemontana divaricata on alloxan induced diabetic
mouse model. The variant doses like 300 and 400 mg/kg of
body weight the extract was allowed to pass intraperitonially
and the blood glucose levels were measured at 0, 2, 6, 12 and
16 hours of time interval. With a standard drug metformin, the
anti-hyperglycemic effect of the extract was compared. At
12th hour of the treatment period the extract of 400 mg/kg
decreased maximum blood glucose level from 14.19±0.47 to
6.86±0.41 mmol/L. Also the extract was subjected to Brine
shrimp lethality bioassay. Then the LC50 value of the extract
was 27.87μg/ml. So, the present results demonstrated that the
leaves of Tabernaemontana divaricata has potential anti-
diabetic, compared to standard drugs [38].
Anti-cancer Activity
Hydro alcoholic decoction of flowers of the plant was tested
for anticancer activity. By soxhlet extraction method, the
extract was prepared. Here the solvent petroleum ether and
hydroalcohol were used. In the in vitro study against human
cancer cell line (HeLa) the experiment was performed. Also
to analyze the cell growth inhibition MTT assay was used.
The results of hydro alcoholic decoction of flowers of
Tabernaemontana divaricata showed a moderate amount of
anticancer activity and the IC50 value was greater than100
μg/ml. The further research is needed to clarify the anticancer
activity of the plant [39].
Hepato-protective Activity
Hepato-protective effects of Tabernaemontana divaricata was
evaluated in rats against DEN and Fe NTA induced liver
necrosis. Ethanolic decoction of Tabernaemontana divaricata
was used at doses of 200 and 400mg/kg bodyweight and
standard drug was 5-fluorouracil. Sample and standard was
orally executed to male Wistar Albino rats once daily for 24
weeks. Simultaneously, they were treated with the carcinogen
DEN and Fe NTA. In case of simultaneously treated rats the
plant extract notably reduces uric acid, bilirubin, AST; ALT
and ALP parameters in blood as well as it increased marker
enzymes levels in liver. Comparison with the treated group,
the treatment with the extracts showed a significant increase
in the levels of antioxidant components and reduces the levels
of malondialdehyde. But the results showed better in all the
parameters when, comparing with 200mg/kg body weight
rats, 400 mg/kg body weight rats and 5-fluorouracil treated
rats. So the protective effect of the extract was confirmed
against induced liver necrosis by this histopathological study.
Thus the plant has a very good hepato-protective effect
against liver cell necrosis [38, 40].
Antinociceptive Activity
In mice, the crude ethanolic extract of the leaves of
Tabernaemontana divaricata showed antinociceptive activity
by using the model of acetic acid induced writhing. The
extract resulted significant inhibition of writhing in acetic acid
induced mice at the oral 250 and 500 mg/kg body weight of
the respective dose. That was compared to the standard drug
diclofenac sodium at the dose of 25 mg/kg of body weight.
The experiment demonstrated that produced serious
antinociceptive activity [38, 41].
Toxicity Assessment
Tabernaemontana divaricata carried out a huge number of
pharmacological activities so it is very essential to know the
toxicological evaluation of the plant. According to Henriques
and colleagues investigation of mice, the toxicity of the plant
using the behavior screening test treated with alcoholic or
aqueous extracts of the plant sample at doses of 150- 200
mg/kg body weight. By this test it was reported, at these
concentrations the results were almost identical from control
animals that indicate no toxicity [27]. On the other hand,
according to Melo and Colleagues demonstration of the major
alkaloids of the plant ‘voacristine’ which introduced on
cultures of yeast the dose-dependent cytostatic and cytotoxic
effects. In case of toxicity assay of Tabernaemontana
divaricata, there were only a few experiments have done. It is
highly important to make out the adverse toxicity effects and
to continue the further investigations for toxicity of the plant
[23].
Conclusion
The current review article highlighted that the
Tabernaemontana divaricata Linn. Has the immense
potentiality for morphological, phytochemical, nutritional,
ethno botanical parameters as well as prominent medicinal
properties. Through this review article, it can be said that the
plant has been used as an important remedial agent for several
physiological disorders in different parts of the world. Also
the review cited the important biological or biochemical
properties of Tabernaemontana divaricata as well as it
highlights the researchers are actively working with this plant
to know the ethno biological potentiality. Therefore,
considering its entire aspects it can be concluded that there is
an ample scope for future research on Tabernaemontana
divaricata [42-46].
Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful to Dr. Madhusudan Mondal, Former
Additional Director, Botanical Survey of India, and Kolkata
for identifying the plant and giving valuable taxonomical
inputs.
Conflict of Interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.