QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS USING AERIAL PARTS FROM DOUBLE FLOWER VARIETY OF TABERNEMONTANA DIVARICATA

Extract preparation
Flowers, Leaves and Stem were collected
from the plant then washed, shade dried and
powdered. For the preparation of ethanol extract,
30g of each powdered materials had been
extracted with 200ml absolute ethanol using
soxhlet apparatus for 24 hours. The solvent was
dispersed under vacuum and dried extracts used
for further analysis. Each extracts were mixed
with suitable amount of respective solvent at the
time of usage. This hot percolation method wasdone in the department of biotechnology,
Marudupandiyar college, Thanjavur.
Qualitative Phytochemical screening
Several chemical tests to ascertain
different phytochemicals are follows [18-22]
Alkaloids
Alkaloids were identified through Mayer’s
test. In the test, the extracted residues were
dissolved in 2N Hydrochloric acid. The mixture
was filtered and the filtrate treated with a few
drops of Mayer’s reagent. Formation of cream
precipitate indicates the presence of alkaloids.
Flavonoids
Using alkaline reagent test, flavonoids
were detected. During this test, extracts treated
with few drops of NaOH solution. After addition of
dilute hydrochloric acid, formed intense yellow
colour, which becomes colourless, indicates the
presence of flavonoids.
Steroids
Libermann Burchard test was used for the
identification of steroids. Within the test, few
drops of acetic anhydride was added to the
extract, boiled and cooled. After cooling,
concentrated H2SO4 also added to the sides of the
tube. At the junction of two layers a brown ring
formation followed by upper layer turns into
green reveals the presence of steroids.
Terpenoids
Terpenoids were found by means of
salkowski test. In this test, extracts treated with
little drops of Conc. H2SO4 leads to yellow
coloured lower layer formation shows the
existence of terpenoids.
Glycosides
During the examination of glycosides,
extracts added with 5ml of dilute H2SO4 on water
bath. Filtrates neutralize with 0.1ml of 5% NaOH.
0.1ml of Fehling’s solution A and B added until it
becomes alkaline and keep in water bath for
2minutes. Development of red precipitate
illustrates the occurrence of glycosides.
Cardiac Glycosides
In this experiment, small amount of
extracts dissolved in 1 ml of glacial acetic acid
containing 1 drop of ferric chloride solution and
1ml of Conc. sulphuric acid. Appearance of brown
ring between the interface reveals the presence of
cardioids.
Saponins
Using foam test, saponins were detected.
In the examination, little amount of extracts shake
with water. If foam produced persists for
10minutes shows the presence of saponins.
Tannins
Tannins were identified through ferric
chloride test. Within this test, small amount of
extracts dissolve in water separately. When
extracts treated with 5% dilute ferric chloride
leads to the appearance of blue colour if
hydrolysable tannins are present. Condensed
tannins are identified by the existence of green
colour.
Phenols
During the time for the analysis of phenols,
small volume of extracts dissolved in alcohol and
alcoholic ferric chloride added to the above
mixtures. Violet colour formation leads to the
presence of phenols.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates were found via Molisch’s
test. In this test, distilled water was used to
dissolve extracts and filtered. Few drops of
alcoholic α-naphthol solution and few drops of
conc. H2So4 added to the extracts containing test
tubes resulted in purple to violet colour ring at the
junction of two layers reveals the occurrence of
carbohydrates.
Protein
Using Biuret test, protein was ascertained.
In this examination, with 2ml of extracts, 1ml of
40% NaOH and 2 drops of 1% Copper sulphate
(Cuso4) were added. Appearance of violet colour
shows the existence of protein.
Quantitative analysis
Phenols, Flavonoids and Protein were
measured by means of diverse methods. They are
as follows [23-25]
Total Phenols
Total phenols was analysed using Folin-
Ciocaltaeu method. In 200 μl of Samples, 1ml of
folin- ciocalteu reagent and 0.8 ml of sodium
carbonate (7.5%) was added. The tubes stand for
30 min. Absorption measured at 765 nm. Gallic
acid was used as standard. The total phenolic
content expressed as gallic acid equivalents (GAE)
in milligram per gram extract.
Total flavonoids
Total flavonoids was estimated by
aluminium chloride colorimetric method. In this
test, extracts (50μl) added to 4950 μl of distilled
water and mixed with 0.3 ml of 5 % NaNO2. This
mixture incubated for 5 min at room temperature
and 0.3 ml of 10 % AlCl3 was added. After 6
minutes of incubation, 2 ml of 1M NaOH was
combined followed by the addition of 2.4 ml
distilled water. Absorbance taken at 510 nm.
Quercetin was used as standard.
Total Protein
Total protein was calculated via Lowry’s
method. In this procedure, with different
concentrations of standards, 0.1 ml of extracts was
added in the separate tubes and volume made up
to 1ml with distilled water. In all the tubes, 5 ml of
alkaline copper sulphate reagent was mixed and
left at room temperature for 10 min. Then 0.5 ml
of folin - ciocalteau reagent was dissolved and
incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The
colour developed read at 660 nm and the protein
concentration expressed as mg per gm extract.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The result of the present study made
known the presence of flavonoids, terpenoids,
phenols, tannins, carbohydrates and protein in all
parts. But alkaloids and steroids were absent only
in flowers. In stem, Cardiac glycosides, steroids
and saponins were not present. It is specified in
Table 1.
Quantitative analysis from ethanol extract
of T.divaricata revealed that the rich amount of
flavonoids and protein present in leavesl and
flowers when compared to stem. As well as in
leaves increased level of phenols were observed
when compared to stem and flowers. Total
flavonoids was assessed as 19.6 milligram
quercetin equivalents/g (mg QE/g), 15.4 mg QE/g
and 7.1 mg QE/g in leaves, flowers and stem.
Likewise in leaves, flowers and stem, total phenols
was estimated as 47.1milligram gallic acid
equivalents/g (mg GAE/g), 6.2 mg GAE/g and 5.4
mg GAE/g respectively. Moreover total protein
level was deliberated. It is denoted in Table 2.