Tabernaemontana divaricata extract inhibits neuronal acetylcholinesterase activity in rats

2.1. Plant materials

Tabernaemontana divaricata was collected from Phitsanulok, Thailand. The voucher specimen (collection no. Changwijit 0020) was deposited at the PBM herbarium, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mahidol University, Thailand.
2.2. Extract of Tabernaemontana divaricata

Roots of Tabernaemontana divaricata were separated from the whole plants and dried at 55 °C. The dried materials were ground, macerated with 95% ethanol twice (for 3 and 7 days) and dried by evaporating the ethanol extracts under a reduced pressure. The yield of the ethanolic extracts from roots of Tabernaemontana divaricata was 9.16% of dried materials. To confirm the quality of TDE in each experiment, each lot of TDE was microplate assayed for AChE and BuChE activity in vitro prior to its use in animals.
2.3. In vitro analysis for AChE and BuChE activity

The assay for measuring ChE activity was modified from the assay described by Ellman et al. (1961) and Ingkaninan et al. (2003). Briefly, 125 μl of 3 mM 5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB), 25 μl of 15 mM acetylthiocholine iodide (ATCI) for AChE activity or butyrylthiocholine idoide (BTCI) for BuChE activity, 50 μl of buffer, and 25 μl of sample dissolved in buffer containing not more than 10% methanol were added to microplate wells, followed by 25 μl of 0.28 U/ml AChE. The microplate was then read at 405 nm every 5 s for 2 min by a CERES UV 900C microplate reader (Bio-Tek instrument, USA). The velocities of the reactions were measured. Enzyme activity was calculated as a percentage of the velocities compared to that of the blank sample. Inhibitory activity was calculated by subtracting the percentage of enzyme activity from 100%. Every experiment was done in triplicate. Stock solutions of samples in Trisma–hydrochloride (Tris–HCl) buffer containing not more than 10% methanol were diluted serially with Tris–HCl buffer to obtain eight or nine different concentrations. The concentration of TDE and galantamine required to inhibit 50% enzymatic activity (IC50) were determined in triplicated by using the software package Prism (Graph Pad Inc., San Diego, USA).
2.4. In vivo study protocol

A total of 136 male Wistar rats, weighing 100–150 g, were purchased from the National Animal Center, Salaya campus, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. All rats were housed, two or three per cage, with free access to food and water for at least 1 week prior to the study. The research protocol adhered to the “Guide for the Care and Use of Animals in compliance with the National Institute of Health guideline for the care and treatment of animals” and followed the appropriate Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Standard Operating Procedure for animal identification (approved protocol number 07/2547), housing and diet before and during the experiments.

For the study of ChE activity, 112 rats were divided into 16 groups (n = 7 per group). Each group was injected intraperitoneally with one of the following doses of TDE dissolved in ethanol (EtOH): 0, 250, 500 or 1000 mg/kg. The animals administered with each TDE dose were divided into four sets. Each set was sacrified 10, 30, 60 or 120 min following TDE injection intraperitoneally. The minimum dose of TDE used in this study was 250 mg/kg, since this dose was half of the lowest dose (500 mg/kg) reported to affect parasympathetic activity, such as vasodilatation or mild respiratory depression in animal models (Taesotikul et al., 1989). The intraperitoneal lethal doses of the ethanolic extracts from roots was 2000 mg/kg, in which the signs and symptoms observed after this lethal dose were paralysis of skeletal muscles, irregular breathing, cyanosis, asphyxia, tremor, clonic convulsion, coma and death within 8–25 min after injection (Taesotikul et al., 1989). No animals in this study showed any signs and symptoms while receiving any doses of TDE. For the positive control of TDE on ChE activity, eight rats were divided into two groups (n = 4 per group). Each group was injected intraperitoneally with either 0 or 10 mg/kg of galantamine dissolved in saline. These eight animals were sacrificed 120 min following galantamine injection.

For the study of neuronal activity in the cerebral cortex, the Fos immunohistochemistry technique was used. In this study, rats were divided into four groups (n = 6 per group). Each group was injected intraperitoneally with one of the following doses of TDE dissolved in ethanol (EtOH); 250 mg/kg (group 1), 500 mg/kg (group 2), or 1000 mg/kg (group 3). Control animals (0 mg/kg TDE, group 4) were intraperitoneally injected with EtOH alone. For the positive control, the other two sets of animals were used. Each group (n = 2 per group) was injected intraperitoneally with either 0 or 10 mg/kg galantamine dissolved in saline. Since Fos protein exhibits maximal expression after 2 h of stimulation, each rat was sacrified 2 h after intraperitoneal TDE injection for the Fos immunohistochemistry study.
2.5. ChE activity determinations in blood and cortical samples

Determination of ChE activity was based on the colorimetric method originally described by Ellman et al. (1961), and adapted for determining the enzyme activity in rat blood and supernatants of cortical homogenates.

All animals were euthanized with pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, i.p.) and then blood samples from the heart were collected before the animals were intracardially perfused with normal saline. Cortical tissues were separately dissected and rapidly removed.

The blood was centrifuged for 6 min at 17,000 rpm at room temperature to separate red blood cells (RBC) and serum. Both RBC and serum samples were immediately measured for ChE activity.

The fresh cortical tissues were weighed and then homogenized in 10 parts of 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH 7.4, which contained 1% Triton-X 100. Following centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C, the clear supernatants were removed and served as the enzyme source. AChE activity was determined in 50 μl aliquots of RBC or the cerebral supernatants (run as duplicates). The reaction was started by adding 0.25 mM 5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DNTB) and either (1) 0.5 mM acetylthiocholine-iodide (ATCI), the commonly used substrate for in vitro AChE determinations (Ellman et al., 1961) or (2) 0.5 mM butyrylthiocholine iodide (BTCI), the commonly used substrate for in vitro BuChE determinations, each combination dissolved in phosphate buffer pH 7.4 (0.1 M). The plate was then immediately placed into an automatic microplate reader and the yellow reaction product was quantified at 22 °C using a wavelength of 405 nm. The reaction was monitored over a period of 10 min with readouts taken every 10 s. The reaction was then processed by a program controlled by the plate reader. Data were stored in a computer. Quantification of the enzymatic activity was based on a change in optical density in the linear range over time, using the molar extinction coefficient of the reaction products. The spectrophotometric absorption was quantitatively measured and expressed as nmol acetylcholine hydrolysed/min/ml RBC or /mg cortical tissue and nanomole butyrylcholine hydrolysed/min/ml plasma or /mg cortical tissue. All chemicals used in this study were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Co. (St. Louis, MO).
2.6. Fos immunohistochemistry

To address the possibility that TDE enhanced neuronal activity, the expression of Fos proteins in cortical neurons following acute TDE administration was determined. Fos is a cellular marker in which the pattern of its staining can provide clues about the involvement of specific neuronal populations as being involved in learning-associated signal processing or having been activated by external stimuli (Marcus et al., 1998, Aggleton and Pearce, 2001, Bozon et al., 2002). Therefore, if neurons are activated via TDE, Fos-positive neurons in brain tissues, particularly the cerebral cortex, following TDE administration should be observed.

In this study, each animal was deeply anesthetized 2 h after TDE and galantamine injections with pentobarbital (80 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) and perfused intracardially with phosphate buffer saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. The whole brain was removed, post-fixed and placed in 30% sucrose overnight and then frozen and cut into 40 μm-thick, transverse frozen sections. Every section was processed for Fos, using a rabbit polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz, 1:1,000 dilution). A black reaction product was produced with a standard ABC reaction (Vectastatin Elite kit; Vector Labs) with nickel intensification using Vectastain, and the sections were mounted on slides. Processing for Fos was similar to that described previously (Chattipakorn et al., 1999).
2.7. Data analysis

For Fos immunohistochemistry, changes in the number of Fos-positive cells in the cortical regions between different treatment groups were counted using a double-blinded technique as described in Chattipakorn et al. (1999). Data from Fos immunohistochemistry and ChE activity were expressed as mean ± S.E. Statistical analyses were carried out using parametric analysis (ANOVA) and Fisher's L.S.D. test for post hoc testing to calculate the significance for both TDE-treated and control rats. Significance was set at P < 0.05.
3. Results

The IC50 of TDE for AChE and BuChE activity was 2.56 ± 0.37 and 76.95 ± 0.11 mg/l, respectively. The AChE inhibitory effect of TDE from the microplate assay was less potent than that of galantamine (IC50 for AChE and BuChE: 0.22 ± 0.04 and 23.96 ± 9.03 mg/l) (Fig. 1). These findings confirm those of a previous report (Ingkaninan et al., 2003) and suggest that TDE is a ChE inhibitor, but it inhibited AChE activity more than BuChE activity in this in vitro study.

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 1. The dose response curve of % AChE inhibition from roots of Tabernaemontana divaricata extract (♢) in comparison with that of galantamine (▾). Values are the mean of one typical experiment performed in triplicate.

The percentage inhibition of AChE activity in the cerebral cortex compared to that in the control was 17.4 ± 6.3%, 22.7 ± 6.9% and 16.6 ± 5.0% for 250, 500, and 1000 mg/kg TDE, respectively, 2 h after intraperitoneal administration. These levels of AChE activity in the TDE groups were significantly different from those in the controls (P < 0.05, Fig. 2). No difference was found among these TDE-treated groups (P = 0.39, Fig. 2). In contrast to AChE activity, the % BuChE inhibitory effects in the cerebral cortex of all three TDE-treated groups were 12.3 ± 5.3%, 15.2 ± 5.2% and 8.6 ± 4.4% for 250, 500, and 1000 mg/kg TDE, respectively, 2 h after intraperitoneal administration (Fig. 2). BuChE activities in the cerebral cortex from all three TDE-treated groups were not significantly different from those in the controls (P = 0.1). In the positive control study, it was found that galantamine, 2 h after the acute single intraperitoneal administration of 10 mg/kg, could inhibit the activity of cortical AChE (28 ± 6%) and BuChE (0.6 ± 4%) when compared to the activity seen in the control (0 mg/kg galantamine). Our study used 10 mg/kg of galantamine as a positive control for TDE administration because this dose had been previously reported as having AChE inhibitory effects in mouse forebrain (Bores et al., 1996). The percentage of AChE and BuChE inhibitory activities in cortical tissues 2 h after galantamine injection was similar to that of the TDE administration. The different time points in cortical AChE and BuChE inhibitory activities following TDE administration were investigated further in this study. No significant differences in cortical AChE and BuChE activity were found between all doses of TDE-treated groups and the control group at 10, 30 and 60 min after TDE administration (P > 0.1, Fig. 3, Fig. 4).

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 2. Normalized % cortical ChE inhibition levels in rats (cortical ChE activity of {(TDE0 − TDEx/TDE0) × 100}) 2 h after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE (TDEx). TDE0 represents the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE). Each data point represents mean ± S.E. AChE: acetylcholinesterase; BuChE: butyrylcholinesterase, ChE: cholinesterase. *p < 0.05 compared to the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE = TDE0).

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 3. Normalized % cortical AChE inhibition levels in rats (cortical AChE activity of {(TDE0 − TDEx/TDE0) × 100}) at different time points after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE (TDEx: 250, 500, 1000 mg/kg). TDE0 represents the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE). Each data point represents mean ± S.E. AChE: acetylcholinesterase. *p < 0.05 compared to the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE = TDE0).

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 4. Normalized % cortical BuChE inhibition levels in rats (cortical BuChE activity of {(TDE0 − TDEx/TDE0) × 100}) at different time points after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE (TDEx: 250, 500, 1000 mg/kg). TDE0 represents the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE). Each data point represents mean ± S.E. BuChE: butyrylcholinesterase.

In contrast to the findings in cortical tissue, TDE had no effect on ChE activity in the circulation, either in erythrocyte AChE or plasma BuChE activities 2 h after TDE administration (Fig. 5). The percentage inhibition of circulating AChE and BuChE activities 2 h after 10 mg/kg-galantamine administration intraperitoneally was 2.6 ± 1% and 5 ± 1%, respectively. The circulating ChE activity after galantamine administration was not significantly different from that in the control (P = 0.063). The results of this study are consistent with those of a previous report, which demonstrated that the AChE inhibitory effects of galantamine in the circulation were insignificant 2 h after administration (Bores et al., 1996). These findings suggest that TDE may be a short-acting and reversible agent in inhibiting ChE activity in the circulation, similar to galantamine. To investigate that possibility, this study also analyzed the erythrocyte AChE or plasma BuChE activities at 10, 30, and 60 min after TDE administration. We found that the circulating AChE activity significantly decreased at those time points after TDE administration when compared to the control (P < 0.05). The mean percentage of circulating AChE inhibition at all three time points were in the range of 7–25%. Our findings indicate that TDE is a reversibly selective AChE inhibitor.

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 5. Normalized % circulating ChE inhibition levels in rats (circulating ChE activity of {(TDE0 − TDEx/TDE0) × 100}) 2 h after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE (TDEx). TDE0 represents the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE). Each data point represents mean ± S.E. AChE: acetylcholinesterase, BuChE: butyrylcholinesterase.

In this study, it was demonstrated that TDE could induce Fos-like immunoreactivity (FLI) in the nuclei of the cerebral cortex 2 h after TDE administration. No FLI-positive neurons were found in the cortical sections, in which the primary antibody was omitted (Fig. 6a). The FLI-positive neurons were scattered all over the cerebral cortex in all TDE-treated groups (Fig. 6b–e). The number of FLI-positive neurons per animal in the cerebral cortex was 101 ± 14, 124 ± 19 and 108 ± 22 in the groups administered intraperitoneally with 250, 500 and 1000 mg/kg of TDE, respectively. The numbers of cortical FLI-positive neurons in all three TDE-treated groups were greater (P < 0.05) than those in the control group (49 ± 9, Fig. 7). However, FLI-positive neurons in the cerebral cortex among the three TDE-treated groups were not significantly different (P = 0.1). Furthermore, galantamine (10 mg/kg, intraperitoneal injection; Fig. 6g) induced greater FLI in the cerebral cortex than in the control (NSS, intraperitoneal injection; Fig. 6f). These results suggest that TDE can enhance neuronal activity in the cerebral cortex similarly to galantamine (an AChE inhibitor) and that its enhancement of neuronal activity is dose-independent for the doses used in this study.

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 6. Representations of Fos-positive neurons in the cerebral cortex 2 h after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE. (a) Negative control represents the cortical tissue from the 1000 mg/kg TDE-treated group with the primary Fos antibody omission. (b–e) Representation of the cortical tissue 2 h after intraperitoneal TDE injection (0 mg/kg (b), 250 mg/kg (c), 500 mg/kg (d) and 1000 mg/kg (e)). (f–g) Representation of the cortical tissue 2 h after intraperitoneal galantamine injection (0 mg/kg (f), 10 mg/kg (g)).

    Download : Download full-size image

Fig. 7. Mean Fos-positive neurons per animal in the cerebral cortex 2 h after intraperitoneal injection of various doses of TDE (n = 6 per group). *p < 0.05 compared to the control group (0 mg/kg of TDE).
4. Discussion

The major finding of this study was that TDE can inhibit neuronal AChE activity in an animal model, as it does in vitro. This study also demonstrated, for the first time, that TDE has cortical AChE inhibitory effects and can enhance neuronal activity in an animal model.

Our finding demonstrated that TDE could inhibit cortical AChE activity in a dose-independent manner 2 h after administration, but had no effect on cortical BuChE at that time point. These results are consistent with the study's in vitro finding, in which TDE was shown to inhibit AChE activity more than BuChE activity. These findings suggest that TDE may be a selective AChE-I similar to donepezil and galantamine (Ballard, 2002). In contrast to the in vitro study, in which the AChE inhibitory effect of TDE was ten times less than that of galantamine, it is important to note that the cortical AChE inhibitory effect in the in vivo study, 2 h after TDE administration, was the same as that of galantamine. The percentage inhibition of cortical AChE activity following galantamine administration in our study is consistent with that in reports from previous animal studies (Bores et al., 1996, Geerts et al., 2005). Therefore, the differences between in vitro and in vivo results may possibly be due to those variations in the bioavailability of active compounds in TDE and galantamine in animal models.

We also found that TDE could inhibit neuronal AChE activity about 20%, suggesting that TDE may not be a potent AChE-I compared to others commercially available AChE-Is (donepezil, tacrine, rivastigmine) (Kosasa et al., 1999). Kosasa and colleagues reported that the percentage inhibition of neuronal AChE activity in an ex vivo study in rats was 30–46%. Their finding was detected by using microdialysis and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with electrochemical detection of neuronal AChE activity 0.5–2 h after a single administration of several AChE-Is, such as 2.5 mg/kg of donepezil, 10 mg/kg of tacrine and 2.5 mg/kg of rivastigmine. Therefore, the low potency of TDE in the neuronal AChE inhibition from this study might have been for several reasons. First, the method we used in the analysis of ChE activity in the brain was less sensitive in detecting AChE activity than the microdialysis and HPLC method. Second, the TDE was in the form of a crude extract, which, naturally, contained all of the alkaloids of TDE. The pharmacological properties of these alkaloids have been previously identified. Although several alkaloids may act as AChE-Is, some may not (van Beek et al., 1984). Thus, the inhibitory effect of TDE that results from mixed-compounds acting as AChE-Is may be less potent than specific therapeutic drugs for Alzheimer's disease. Finally, a consideration in the use of several medications in the treatment of neurodegenerative disease is the capacity of the drug to pass the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Our findings show that TDE has an inhibitory effect on neuronal AChE activity, suggesting that it can cross the BBB. However, the neuronal AChE inhibitory effect of TDE could not be detected until 2 h after administration. This suggests that the efficiency of TDE in crossing the BBB may be low. The efficiency of TDE in crossing the BBB is neither known nor has it been compared with available AChE-Is. It is possible that TDE may have a lower efficacy in crossing the BBB compared to other inhibitors, causing the AChE activity measured in this study to be less than those observed in other studies. Future studies on the inhibitory effect of purified alkaloids from TDE on AChE activity, as well as the efficacy of TDE in passing the BBB, will be needed to prove this hypothesis.

There are several possible active compounds in TDE that could play a role as AChE-Is. The Tabernaemontana divaricata specimens used in this study were in the form of crude extracts. These crude extracts consisted of at least forty-four alkaloids (Rastogi, 1980, Sharma and Cordell, 1988, Van Der Heijden, 1989), and non-alkaloid constituents; such as triterpenoids (Rastogi, 1980, Sharma and Cordell, 1988, Van Der Heijden, 1989), steroids (Sharma and Cordell, 1988, Dagino, 1991), flavonoids (Henriques et al., 1996), phenyl propanoids (Henriques et al., 1996) and phenolic acids (Henriques et al., 1996). Previous studies have shown that several alkaloids in TDE, such as coronaridine (Andrade et al., 2005), voacangine (Andrade et al., 2005) and isovoacristine (Raymond-Hamet, 1962), have anti-AChE activity in vitro. Therefore, the inhibitory effects of AChE activity in our animal model could be due to the effect of mixed alkaloids in TDE. The inhibitory AChE effects of each pure alkaloid in TDE also need to be determined in future studies.

The results of this study also demonstrated the enhancement of cortical neuronal activity 2 h following the administration of TDE, as indicated by an increase in Fos-positive neurons. The cerebral cortex was chosen to determine neuronal activity and ChE activity, since it plays an important role in learning and memory, and is generally the main representative of the central cholinergic innervation (Warburton et al., 2003). In the analysis of the immediate early gene (IEG), Fos induction is a useful tool for investigating activated neuronal populations. Fos acts as a messenger in coupling short-term neuronal activity with changes at the level of gene transcription and, as such, should serve as a marker for those neurons undergoing some modification as a result of learning (Morgan and Curran, 1990, Curran and Morgan, 1995, Hughes and Dragunow, 1995). In normal physiological states, the basal level of IEG expression in the brain is low. However, different stimuli can induce IEG in neurons of CNS structures known to be involved in the processing of these stimuli.

The augmentation of neuronal activity following TDE administration could result from at least two possible mechanisms. First, TDE acts as an AChE-I in animals as it does in vitro. AChE is an esterase critical in the metabolism of ACh at central and peripheral synapses (Koelle, 1963). If AChE activity is inhibited, ACh levels should be increased. ACh is plentiful and widely distributed in the brain. The cholinergic system is capable of keeping the neocortex operative (Giacobini, 2003a). Therefore, high ACh levels in the cerebral cortex could lead to an increase in cortical neuronal activity. The evidence that TDE acts as a cortical AChE-I in an animal model as demonstrated in this study support this mechanism. Moreover, a previous study demonstrated that the administration of AChE-Is could lead to endogenous acetylcholine (ACh)-induced Fos expression in the supra-optic nucleus of the rat hypothalamus (Shen and Sun, 1995). Therefore, the enhancement of Fos expression in cortical neurons following TDE administration, as shown in this study, suggests that TDE may cause an increase of endogenous ACh in the cerebral cortex, resulting in an increase in cortical activity, similar to that observed in other AChE-Is. The number of Fos-positive cortical neurons in this study was quite similar to that of Fos expression in the supra-optic neurons after the administration of AChE-Is (Shen and Sun, 1995) and that of cortical neurons expressing Fos after animals had been undergoing the learning process in a previous study (Tronel and Sara, 2002). Furthermore, the amount of Fos neurons in the cerebral cortex following TDE administration was much less than the expression of Fos following organophosphate exposure (Zimmer et al., 1998). Therefore, the expression of Fos following TDE administration should not be due to the possible excitotoxicity of TDE.

In the enhancement of cortical neuronal activity, another possible mechanism of TDE could be its part as an allosteric potentiating ligand (APL) binding at the nicotinic ACh receptor (nAChR), and directly potentiating neuronal activity. It has been shown that galantamine is an APL at the nAChR (Woodruff-Pak et al., 2001). Since TDE can inhibit AChE activity and show characteristics similar to galantamine, it is, therefore, possible that TDE could enhance cortical neuronal activity via this mechanism. However, further investigations are needed to justify this possible mechanism.

We showed that both the effect of TDE on the cortical AChE activity and cortical neuronal activity lacks dose-dependent effects. The possible explanation of these findings may be that TDE acts as an AChE inhibitor. Thus, the action of this TDE may depend upon the amount of AChE level in the brain. If the 250 mg/kg of TDE inhibits all of the AChE activity in the brain, increasing the dose of TDE should not further inhibit AChE activity. Therefore, the effect of TDE may not be dose-dependent.

Our study demonstrated that the mean percentage of ChE inhibition from TDE in the circulation was insignificant 2 h after TDE administration, but was significant at 10, 30 and 60 min after TDE administration. These results were similar to those previously observed after galantamine administration (Sweeney et al., 1989, van Beijsterveldt et al., 2004, Geerts et al., 2005). Those previous studies have shown that the inhibition of enzyme activity following galantamine administration reduces over time. We found that the inhibition of AChE activity by TDE is also time-dependent and reversible. The rapid clearance of TDE may cause the short term-inhibition of circulating AChE activity following a single-dose administration of TDE. Future studies are needed to investigate the bioavailability of TDE.
5. Conclusions

Preclinical analyses using in vivo enzymatic techniques in this study demonstrated that TDE is a reversibly selective AChE inhibitor and can enhance neuronal activity, suggesting that it may be a candidate for the treatment of AD. Future investigations such as behavioral studies, therapeutic indices, pharmacokinetics and complete toxicological evaluation of TDE are necessary to determine its therapeutic benefits.