Analgesic and Anti-inflammatory Effect of Ethanolic Extract of Tabernaemontana divaricata L. Flowers in Rats

Plant
The flowers of TD were collected from Chidambaram, Cuddalore, Tamil Nadu, India. The plant was identified and
authenticated by Chief Botanist, Department of Botany, Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar Chidambaram,
Cuddalore, Tamil Nadu, India. A voucher specimen has been kept at the herbarium of the University.
Preparation of extract
The flowers of TD were dried in shade, powdered and passed through a 40-mesh sieve. Dried powder (500 g) was
taken and subjected to successive extraction with petroleum ether, chloroform, ethanol and water in soxhlet
apparatus. The extracts were concentrated to dry residue by distillation (temperature 60 °C without vacuum) and
dried completely in desiccators and weighed. The extract of TD was freeze dried and stored at –80°C until further
use. The dried mass (yield=20 g) was diluted with normal saline and used in experiments.
Preliminary phytochemical screening
Petroleum ether, chloroform, ethanolic and aqueous extracts of TD was subjected to preliminary phytochemical
screening for their presence or absence of active constituents utilizing standard method of analyses [7].
Drugs and chemicals
Carrageenan and indomethacin were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA. Acetic acid was procured
from Pure Chem. Ltd., India.
Preparation of ethanolic extract of TD flowers
The dried plant material (100 g) TD flowers were extracted three times by refluxing with distilled water for 8 hrs
and the filtered extract was evaporated on a water bath to get a viscous ethanolic extract.
For dosing, the ethanolic extract of TD was uniformly suspended in 1% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) dissolved
in water and administered orally (p.o.).
Experimental animals
The study was conducted after obtaining institutional ethical committee clearance (160/1999/CPCSEA). Wistar rats
(100–150 g; 4–6 weeks old, either sex) were maintained under controlled conditions of light (12 h/12 h),
temperature (26±2 °C) and relative humidity (44–56%) for one week before and during the experiments. The
animals had access to standard laboratory feed (Gold Mohur, Hindustan Lever Ltd., M
Analgesic activity
Acetic acid-induced writhing test
Analgesic activity was assessed by abdominal writhing test using acetic acid [8]. The animals were divided into six
groups (n=6 each) viz.: group I- acetic acid control (normal saline, 10 ml/kg, p.o.); group II- indomethacin solution
(20 mg/kg, p.o.); group III- TD-I (125 mg/kg, p.o.); group IV- TD-II (250 mg/kg, p.o.) & group V- TD-III (500
mg/kg, p.o.).
In the writhing test, 0.2 ml of 0.6 % acetic acid solution was injected intraperitoneally and the number of writhes
were counted starting 5 min after injection for a period of 20 minutes
Hot plate reaction time
Analgesic activity was assessed by hot plate latency assay [8]. The animals were divided into six groups (n=6 each).
The animals were divided into six groups (n=6 each) viz.; group I: control (normal saline 10 ml/kg, p.o.); group II:
indomethacin (20 mg/kg p.o); group III: TD–I (125 mg/kg, p.o.); group IV: TD–II (250 mg/kg, p.o.) & group V:
TD–III (500 mg/kg, p.o.).
Rats from each group were placed on the hot plate after drug administration. Then reaction time for the animal to
lick the paw or jump from the hot plate was taken as the latency (s). This was repeated at 60 and 90 minutes from
the exact time given. The average of the latency was determined from the six rats in each group. The temperature of
the hot plate was maintained at 55 ± 1ºC. The cut off time was kept at 20 seconds.
Anti-inflammatory activity
Carrageenan-induced hind paw edema
Inflammation was induced by administering 0.1 ml of (1%) carrageenan into sub-plantar surface of rat hind paw [9].
The animals were divided in to six groups (n=6 each) viz.; group I: carrageenan control (normal saline 10 ml/kg,
p.o.); group II: indomethacin (20 mg/kg p.o); group III: TD–I (125 mg/kg, p.o.); group IV: TD–II (250 mg/kg, p.o.)
& group V: TD–III (500 mg/kg, p.o.).
In this method, all drugs were given orally. One hour later all animals were injected with 0.1 ml of 1% Carrageenan
solution in the sub-plantar aponeurosis of left hind paw and the paw volume was measured plethysmometrically at 1
hr, 3 hr and 5 hr. Indomethacin (20 mg/kg, p.o.) as standard and ethanolic extract of TD administered by the
intragastric route 1 hr before administration of carrageenan.
Safety of drugs on gastric mucosa of rats (ulcer index)
This method was performed to assess the safety of ethanolic extract of TD on the gastric mucosa of rats. In this
method, the animals were divided into two groups (n=6 each) viz.: group I: indomethacin (20 mg/kg p.o.) & group
II: TD (500 mg/kg, p.o.).
In the present method, higher doses of drugs were given orally. After 5 hours of administration animals were
sacrificed by an overdose of ether vapors. Then the stomachs were removed and opened. The sum of length of
lesions was evaluated for ulcer index score 1, 2 & 3 for erosions 1 mm or less, 1 mm to 2 mm & more than 2 mm
respectively. The overall score was divided by a factor of 10 and designated as ulcer index [10].
Statistical analysis
All the values are expressed as mean ± S.E.M. The statistical significance was determined by ANOVA followed by
Dunnett's test. Values p < 0.05 was considered as significant.
Preliminary Phytochemical Screening
Ethanolic extract of TD flowers showed the presence of alkaloids, carbohydrates, flavonoids, saponins, and terpenes
while proteins, amino acids, phenols, glycosides, fixed oils, volatile oils steroids and tannins were found to be
absent.
Analgesic activity
Effect of ethanolic extract of TD flowers on acetic acid-induced writhing in rats
A significant decrease in acetic acid-induced writhing test was observed in 20 min observation. The score for
writhing was significantly decreased by ethanolic extract of TD flowers at doses of 125, 250 & 500 mg/kg on acetic
acid-induced writhing in rats over the score of control group (p < 0.05). The effect of ethanolic extract of TD
flowers on acetic acid-induced writhing test was comparable to indomethacin (Table 1).
Effect of ethanolic extract of TD flowers on hot plate reaction time in rats
A significant raise in the reaction time on hot plate was observed at 30, 60 and 90 min. In comparison to control
group, ethanolic extract of TD at doses of 125, 250 & 500 mg/kg showed a significant increase in the reaction time
at 30, 60 and 90 min, respectively (p < 0.05). The effect of ethanolic extract of TD flowers on reaction time was
comparable to the standard drug, indomethacin