Antioxidant Activity of Flowers and Leaves of Tabernaemontana Divaricata Linn.

Free radicals have been regarded as a fundamental cause of different kinds of diseases. They cause biochemical damage in cells and tissues, which result in several diseases such as arteriosclerosis, ischemia-reperfusion injury, liver disease, diabetes mellitus, inflammation, renal failure, aging, cancer, etc. The main characteristic of an antioxidant is its ability to trap free radicals. Highly reactive free radicals and oxygen species are present in biological systems from a wide variety of sources. These free radicals may oxidize nucleic acids, proteins, lipids or DNA and can initiate various types of degenerative diseases.6 T.Divaricata L (Family:Apocynaceae).Commonly calledas Nandiyavattom found in the dry regions of Indiaand Sri Lanka.The beneficial properties of T. divaricata are, anti-infection, anti-tumor action, analgesia and the enhancement of cholinergic activity in both peripheral and central nervous systems. The augmentation of cholinergic function may be of therapeutic benefit for many neurodegenerative diseases, particularly myasthenia gravis and Alzheimer's disease.2 chemical constituents include alkaloids and non-alkaloid constituents such as terpenoids, steroids, flavonoids, phenyl propanoids, phenolic acids and enzymes which played an important role in bringing out the activity.

The leaves and flowers of Tabernaemontana divaricatawere collected, thoroughly dried under shade and powdered mechanicallyand sieved through No.20 mesh sieve. The finely powdered leaves and flowers were kept in an airtight container until the time of use.3

Extraction procedure for leaf
The extraction was carried out by cold maceration and mechanical shaking method. The solvent used was 95% ethanol. About 60 g of powder was soaked with 600ml of 95% ethanol for 12 h and then macerated at room temperature using a mechanical shaker for 4 h. The extract was filtered off and the marc was again soaked with the same volume of 95% ethanol for 12 h and then further extracted for 4h and filtered. The filtrates were then combined concentrated under reduced pressure and evaporated at 400C. The percentage yield of the T.Divaricata Leaf extract (TALE) was 27.4%.3

Extraction procedure for flower
The extraction was carried out by continuous hot percolation method using Soxlet apparatus. The solvent used was 95% ethanol. About 50 g of powder was extracted with 400 ml of solvent. The extract was concentrated to dryness under controlled temperature between 40-50ºC. The percentage yield of the T.Divaricata flower extract (TLFE) was 18.2%.3
Reducing power ability
Reducing power ability was measured by mixing 1.0 ml fractions of various concentration prepared with distilled water to 2.5 ml of phosphate buffer (0.2 M, pH 6.6) and 2.5 ml of 1% potassium ferricyanide and incubated at 50°C for 30 min.  After that 2.5 ml of trichloroacetic acid (10%) were added to the mixture and centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm, 2.5 ml from the upper part were diluted with 2.5 ml water and shaken with 0.5 ml fresh 0.1% ferric chloride. The absorbance was measured at 700 nm using UV-spectrophotometer. The reference solution was prepared as above, but contained water instead of the samples.  Increased absorbance of the reaction mixture indicates increased reducing power. All experiments were done in triplicate using butylated hydroxyltoluene (BHT) as positive control.
Superoxide anion scavenging (NBT reduction) assay
A reaction mixture with a final volume of 3 ml per tube was prepared with 1.4 ml of 50 mM KH2PO4-KOH, pH 7.4 containing 1 mM EDTA,  0.5 ml of 100 mM hypoxanthine, 0.5 ml of 100 mM NBT.  The reaction was started by adding 0.066 units per tube of xanthine oxidase freshly diluted in 100 ml of phosphate buffer and 0.5 ml of test extract fractions in saline. The xanthine oxidase was added last. The subsequent rate of NBT reduction was determined on the basis of spectrophotometric determinations of absorbance at 560 nm. Ascorbic acid was used as standard. The results are expressed as the percentage inhibition of NBT reduction rate with respect to the reaction mixture without test compound (saline only).
Hydroxyl radical scavenging (Deoxyribose degradation) assay
The decomposing effect of extract on hydroxyl radicals was determined by the assay of malondialdehyde chromogen formation due to 2-deoxy 2-ribose degradation. The assay mixture contained in a final volume of 1ml: 100 ml of 28 mM 2-deoxy 2-ribose dissolved in phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 500 ml of the plant extract fractions of various concentrations in buffer, 200 ml of 200 mM ferric chloride (1:1 v/v) and 1.04 mM EDTA and 100 ml of 1.0 mM hydrogen peroxide and 100 ml of 1.0 μM ascorbic acid. After incubation of the test sample at 37oC for 1 h the extent of free radical damage imposed on the substrate deoxyribose was measured using thiobarbituric acid (TBA) test. Percentage inhibition of deoxyribose degradation was calculated. Quercetin was used as standard.5
Statistical analysis
Results were statistically evaluated by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnets test, P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
In vitroantioxidant activity
Reducing power ability
Table 1 shows the reductive capabilities of TALE and TLFE when compared to the standard butylated hydroxy toluene (BHT). The increase in absorbance of the reaction mixture containing the extract showed increased reducing power with increase in concentration. The reducing power increased significantly (P<0.01) with increasing amounts of the extract. However, the activity of the TALE and TLFE was less than the standard.
Superoxide radical scavenging activity
The TALE and TLFE was found to be a scavenger of superoxide anion generated in xanthine oxidase-NBT systems (Table 2). The extract showed significant (P<0.01) superoxide inhibiting activity at a concentrations of 25-400 µg/ml. The IC50 of the TALE and TLFE was found to be 188.39 ± 0.42 and 318.13 ± 0.21 respectively where as the IC50 of the standard ascorbic acid is 92.46µg/ml.