Antibacterial Efficacy of Moringa oleifera and Tabernaemontana divaricata Flower Extracts on Occular Pathogens

Materials and Methods
Plant materials
Fresh flowers of M. oleifera and T.
divaricata were plucked with sterilized
forceps in the morning (6 8 am). The
flowers were identified and authenticated
with the herbarium the Botany Department
of Rani Anna Government College (w),
Tirunelveli, Tamilnadu. The collected
flowers were used for extraction directly.
Extract preparation
Plant materials were successively extracted
using solvents of increasing polarity
(Arokiaraj et al., 2009) solvents such as EA,
DCM + M was used for extraction was
done by cold extraction method. Stalk of
flowers were removed to get petals alone.
Each flower, 2 kg of petals was soaked in 5
liter of each solvent viz., Methanol, DCM
and Ethyl acetate in a separate air tight
containing. These were allowed to stand at
room temperature for 5 days, with
occasional manual agitation of the container
using a sterile glass rod at every few hours.
The extracts were separately filtered using
sterile Whatman No.1 filter paper. The
resulted filtrates were then concentrated in a
rotary evaporator (Laborator 4000- efficient,
heidolph Germany) at 400 rpm/50 0 c. Fifty
ml of gummy extract were obtained upon
evaporation for each extract. The gummy
extract was stored at 40
C for further st
Ten bacterial strains isolated from eye
infected cases examined in Agarwal Eye
Hospital, Tirunelveli were used in the study.
Of which nine were gram-positive, bacteria
viz., Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis,
Gardnerella vaginalis, Enterococcus
faecalis, S. agalactiae, Propionibacterium
The results of the antibacterial activity of the
replicates were expressed as antibacterial
activity of the replicates wee expressed as
mean ± standard deviation (SD) and the data
were subjected to examine by analysis of
variance (ANOVA) (p < 0.05) by using a
software, SPSS 13.0 for windows version.
Result and Discussion
Evaluation of the antibacterial potential
of flower extracts
The data pertaining to the antibacterial
potential of the petals of the selected flower
extracts using methanol, DCM, Ethyl
acetate extracts are presented in tables 1 and
2 and figures 1 and 2 respectively. The
extracts from M. oleifera petals showed
inhibitory activity against seven of the ten
ocular bacterial isolates. The DCM extracts
presented the highest activity and the
extracts were able to inhibit six bacterial
isolates viz., (S. epidermidis, G. vaginalis,
E. faecalis, C. macbinleys, B. subtilis and E.
coli). The highest activity rate was recorded
against G. vaginalis (18 ±0.43mm). On the
other hand, the methanol extracts, DCM and
Ethyl acetate extracts also exhibited their
highest activity against C. macbinleys (19
±0.40mm, 16 ±0mm and 15 ±0 mm zone
diameter respectively). Ethyl acetate
extracts of the petals of the flowers of M.
oleifera was able to inhibit three bacterial
species including G. vaginalis, C.
macbinleys and B. cereus. Methanol
extracts were effective against five bacterial
isolates viz., S. epidermidis, E. faecalis, C.
macbinleys, B. cereus and E. coli (Table 1
and Figure 1). In an earlier study it was
pointed out that B. subtilis was more
sensitive to EA, ethanol and methanol
extracts of Eucalyptus and Ocimum, but E.
coli was less sensitive 