Antibacterial Studies Tabernaemontana divaricata (Apocynaceae) Secondary Metabolites Capped Silver Nanoparticles

Synthesis of SNPs
Silver nitrate (AgNO3) of analytical grade
(AR) was purchased from Merck (India). To synthesize
SNPs, 1 ml of the aqueous extract of T. divaricata
flower was added to 100 ml of 1 mM AgNO3 solution in
150 ml glass beaker. Then the beaker was incubated for
24 hrs at room temperature on a magnetic stirrer in the
dark place for the reduction of SNPs. The color change
from light yellow to dark orange indicates the formation
of SNPs. An initial setup was also maintained as flower
extract without the addition of AgNO3.
Test microorganisms of interest
Ten bacterial strains isolated from eye infected
cases examined in Sarojini Devi Eye Hospital,
Hyderabad, were used in the study. Of which nine were
gram-positive, bacteria viz., Staphylococcus aureus, S.
epidermidis, Gardnerella vaginalis, Enterococcus
faecalis, S. agalactiae, Propionibacterium acnes,
Corynebacterium macbinleys, Bacillus serus, B. subtilis
and one gram- negative viz., E. coli. All the bacterial
strains were from patients with eye diseases. The
bacteria were initially identified by streak plate method
in blood agar medium and specifically identified at
Royal Life Sciences Laboratory using enzyme assay
method (VITEK 2 COMPACT) and maintained on
nutrient agar slants at 40C.
Antibacterial activity
Antibacterial activity was carried out using the
well diffusion method on Mueller Hinton Agar (MHA)
plates. The test cultures were swabbed on the top of the
solidified media and allowed to dry for 10 minutes. The
aqueous extract of T. divaricata flowers, synthesized T.
divaricata SNPs were used at two different
concentrations (100 μl and 150 μl per well). The wells
were loaded and left for 30 minutes at room
temperature for compound diffusion. AgNO3 solution
was used as control. The plates were incubated for 24
hrs at 37°C, and the zone of inhibition was measured in
millimeters (mm).
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
MIC of SNPs were determined against all the
strains. The bacterial suspension was prepared, and 100
μl of MHA broth was added to the microtitre plate and
incorporated with different concentration (500, 250,
125, 62.5, 31.25, 15.625, 7.81, 3.90, 1.95, 0.976, 0.48,
0.24 μl) of SNP. The microtitre plate was incubated at
37°C for 24 hrs.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Antibacterial activity by Agar well diffusion assay
The antibacterial effects of biologically
synthesized SNPs have been investigated against Gram-
positive ocular pathogens - Staphylococcus aureus, S.
epidermidis, Gardnerella vaginalis, Enterococcus
faecalis, S. agalactiae, Propionibacterium acnes,
Corynebacterium macbinleys, Bacillus serus, B. subtilis
and one gram- negative viz., E. coli. A clear zone of
growth inhibition was observed against the isolated
strains. It confirms the antibacterial activity of
biologically synthesized nanoparticles. The highest
zone of inhibition was observed in the well loaded with
SNPs, and less zone of inhibition was observed in the
well loaded with only flower extract (Table-1).
In the present investigation, nanoparticles
showed higher inhibition against the Gram-positive
pathogens compared to other Gram negative strain E.
coli, employed in this antibacterial assay. Savithramma
and Rao [13] demonstrated the antibacterial effect of
SNPs and the growth of Pseudomonas and Rhizopus
species were inhibited maximum by the SNPs
synthesized from leaf extract of Svensonia
hyderobadensis, indicating that the SNPs may have an
important advantage over conventional antibiotics.
Consequently, the interaction between Gram positive
bacteria and SNPs were certainly stronger than that of
Gram negative bacteria. The cell wall of gram-negative
bacteria consists of an outer membrane composed of
lipid, protein, and lipopolysaccharides which act as a
barrier and provide effective protection against the
antibacterial agent. However, the cell wall of the Gram-
positive bacteria lacks an outer membrane [14].
MIC of biologically synthesized SNPs
The synthesized SNPs were effective in
inhibiting the bacterial growth. The MIC was checked
against Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, S.
epidermidis, Gardnerella vaginalis, Enterococcus
faecalis, S. agalactiae, Propionibacterium acnes,
Corynebacterium macbinleys, Bacillus serus, B.
subtilis) and Gram-negative (E. coli) bacteria. The
SNPs were used in different concentration such as 500,
250, 125, 62.5, 31.25, 15.63, 7.8, 3.9, 1.95, 0.976, 0.48,
0.24 μl in order to determine the MIC. The SNPs
showed MIC value of 62.5 μl for strain Enterococcus
faecalis, Propionibacterium acnes, 31.25 μl for
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Gardnerella vaginalis,
Staphylococcus agalactiae 15.63 μl for Bacillus cereus,
Bacillus subtilis 7.81 μl for E.Coli, Corynebacterium
macbinleys and S. aureus
Several mechanisms have been proposed to
explain the inhibitory effect of silver nanoparticles on
bacteria. It is assumed that the high affinity of silver
towards sulfur and phosphorus is the key element of the
antimicrobial effect.
Due to the abundance of sulfur-containing
proteins on the bacterial cell membrane, silver
nanoparticles can react with sulfur-containing amino
acids inside or outside the cell membrane, which in turn
affects bacterial cell viability. It was also suggested that
silver ions (particularly Ag+) released from silver
nanoparticles can interact with phosphorus moieties in
DNA, resulting in inactivation of DNA replication, or
can react with sulfur-containing proteins, leading to the
inhibition of enzyme functions [15, 16]. The general
understanding is that Ag nanoparticle of typically less
than 20 nm diameters get attached to sulfur-containing
proteins of bacterial cell membranes leading to greater
permeability of the membrane, which causes the death
of the bacteria [17].
The antibacterial activity of plant based silver
nanoparticles of Ocimum sanctum and Vitex negundo
were tested against Staphylococcus aureus, Vibrio
cholerae, Proteus vulgaris and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, for which significant results were observed
[18]. Antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles
against Staphyloccocus aureus, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Escherichia coli has been investigated
[19]. The antibacterial properties of the biosynthesized
silver nanoparticles when incorporated on textile fabric
were investigated [20]. Silver impregnated medical
devices like surgical masks and implantable devices
showed significant antimicrobial efficiency [21]. The
current investigation suggests that, use of silver ion or
metallic silver as well as silver nanoparticles can be
exploited in medicine for burn treatment, dental
materials, coating stainless steel materials, textile
fabrics, water treatment, sunscreen lotions, etc [22].
Antibacterial activity of cotton fabric coated silver
nanoparticles showed distinct bactericidal effect against
Staphylococcus aureus and E.coli with all the tested
concentration [23]. Seven Apocynaceae members were
studied for their antibacterial activity against ten
pathogens, of which Plumeria alba showed efficient
antibacterial activity and Rauvolfia tetraphylla showed
moderate activity against most of the pathogens [24].
But in this study the plant based Silver nanoparticles
synthesized from T. divaricata was active against the
pathogens studied. Hence the plant based Silver
nanoparticles are found to be more efficient than the
plant extracts that have been used since time immortal.
CONCLUSION
The silver nanoparticles synthesized and
investigated in this study establish a stronger
antibacterial potency which was efficient against most
of the ocular pathogens studied. The green chemistry
approach addressed in the present work on the synthesis
of silver nanoparticles is simple, cost effective and the
resultant nanoparticles are highly stable anreproducible. This approach can be further capitalized
to rapidly screen plants used in traditional medicines for
ailments resulting from microorganism as well as in the
extraction of potential molecules that could be used in
future therapeutics.