Pharmacognostic and Pharmacological Aspects on Tabernaemontana divaricata Plant

Pharmacognostic study
Collection and authentication of plant
Fresh and healthy leaves Tabernaemontana divaricata were
collected from Vadgaon (Charvadwadi), Pune district, India and
brought to the laboratory for quantification i.e. Agharkar Research
Institute, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
Extraction methods
Maceration
Preparation of extract
The dried powder of Tabernaemontana divaricata stems/
leaves/flowers was macerated with 95% (v/v) ethanol or with
respective solvent for 3 days. The supernatant was decanted,
replaced with fresh media, and extracted for two more days. The
extracts were pooled together and evaporated using water bath
to obtain a concentrated crude extract. The yield obtained by
Maceration was 37.9766% [18].
Soxhlet extraction
Preparation of extract
The fresh and disease-free leaves/stems/flowers of
Tabernaemontana divaricata were cleaned thoroughly, shade
dried, finely powdered and subjected to extraction using Soxhlet
apparatus. The plant material was defatted for 18 hours using
petroleum ether (40-50°C) followed by successive extraction with
distilled water, ethanol, chloroform and methanol. In order to get a
crude extract devoid of solvents, the extract was concentrated by
evaporating the solvent using a water bath maintained at 60-80°C
at ambient conditions. The yield obtained by Soxhlet extraction
was 22.556% [18].
Clevenger apparatus
Preparation of extract
Clevenger Apparatus conducts the distillation process by
boiling, condensing and decantation to separate the oil. The dried
powdered of Tabernaemontana divaricata leaves/stems/flowers
were collected and put inside the round bottom flask. Water
was added up to optimum level and the apparatus was fixed.
Temperature was maintained between 40-50°C. Extraction process
was carried out for 6-7 hours to extract the volatile oil [19].
Preliminary analysis
Determination of foreign organic matter
The foreign matter was sorted into groups by visual inspection
and using a hand lens after a 100 g of plant material was spread
in a thin layer. The rest of the sample was sifted through a no. 250
sieve, and dust was considered mineral admixture. Weighing the
sorted foreign matter. Foreign matter of aerial parts powder of
Tabernaemontana divaricata was found to be 0.920% w/w [20].
Determination of ash value
Determination of total ash
In an ignited and tared crucible, 2g of ground dried material was
accurately weighed (usually of platinum and silica). The material
was spread in an even layer and ignited by gradually raising the
temperature to 500-600°c until it was white, indicating the absence
of carbon. Then it was allowed to cool in desiccators before being
weighed. Total ash value of Tabernaemontana divaricata was found
to be 4.90% w/w [20].
Total ash (% w/w) = (z – x)
Y
z = Weight of the crucible + ash (after complete incineration)
x = Weight of the empty crucible
Y = Weight of the material taken.
Determination of water-soluble ash
The ash was obtained as in above total ash, heated for 5 minutes
with 25°c of water, and filtered. Insoluble debris was collected on
ash-free filter paper, rinsed with hot water, and ignited at 450°c
for 15 minutes. After that, the ash was weighed. Water soluble ash
value of aerial parts of Tabernaemontana divaricata was found to
be 2.40% w/w [20,21].
w = Weight of total ash
a = Weight of the residue
Y = Weight of the material taken.
Determination of acid-insoluble ash
The ash was obtained as in above total ash, the ash boiled for
5 minutes with 25 mL of 2M HCL acid, filtered and the insoluble
matter was collected on ash-free filter paper. It was ignited, cooled
in a desiccator, and weighed after being washed with hot water. Acid
insoluble ash value of aerial parts of Tabernaemontana divaricata
was found to be 0.680% w/w [20,21].
a = Weight of the residue
y = Weight of material taken.
Determination of sulphated ash-
The residue was moistened with 1mL sulphuric acid and gently
heated till white fumes no longer evolved. After igniting at 800 ±
25°C, all back particles disappeared. The crucible was allowed to
cool and a few drops of sulphuric acid were added and the crucible
was heated. After igniting it again, the crucible was allowed to
cool and was weighed. Sulphated ash value of aerial parts of
Tabernaemontana divaricata was found to be 3.0% w/w [20,21
Determination of extractive value
The powdered material of the drug (50 g) was packed in a
Soxhlet apparatus and was subjected to successive extraction with
different solvents like Petroleum ether, Ethyl acetate and methanol.
25 mL of filtrate was evaporated to dryness in a tarred bottom
china dish. It was then dried at 105°C and weighed.
Alcoholic extractive value of Tabernaemontana divaricata
was found to be 12.5% w/w. Petroleum ether extractive value of
Tabernaemontana divaricata was found to be 2.40% w/w. Ethyl
acetate extractive value of Tabernaemontana divaricata was found
to be 2.45% w/w.
Determination of loss on drying
In a Petri dish, 2 gm of powder was accurately weighed and
kept in a hot-air oven at 105°C for four hours. After cooling in a
desiccator, the weight loss was measured. This procedure was
repeated several times until the weight remained constant.
Moisture content of Tabernaemontana divaricata was found to be
11.0% w/w [20].
Phytochemical analysis - quantitative tests
Total phenolic content
The amount of total phenolics in extracts was determined
according to the Folin-Ciocalteu procedure [22]. In test tubes,
samples (200 uL) were placed. 1 mL of Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was
added, along with 0.8 mL of sodium carbonate (7.5%). The tubes
were mixed and set aside for 30 minutes. At 765 nm, absorption
was measured. The total phenol found to be 36 ± 1.0 mg of GAE/
gm extract.
Total flavonoid content
The total flavonoid concentration was determined using a
modified colorimetric technique [23]. The plant extract (1.0 mL)
was mixed with 1 mL of distilled water and 75 uL of a 5% NaNO2
solution. 75 ul of 10% AlCl3
.H2
O solution was added after 5 minutes.
5 minutes later, 0.5 mL of 1M sodium hydroxide was added. After
combining the solution, it was allowed to stand for 15 minutes. At
510 nm, absorption was measured. The total flavonoid contents
were found to be 10.67 ± 0.577 mg of QEE/gm extract respectively.
Total protein content
The total protein was calculated using the Lowry., et al. technique
[24]. To each standard concentration, 0.1 mL of plant extract was
added, and the volume was increased to 1 mL with distilled water.
5 mL of alkaline copper sulphate reagent was added to each test
tube and left to stand at room temperature for 10 minutes. After
that, 0.5 mL of Folin Ciocalteu reagent was added and incubated
at room temperature for 20 minutes. At 660 nm, absorption was
measured. The protein concentration was found to be 9.73 ± 0.230
mg/ml.
Phytochemical analysis-qualitative test
Qualitative tests of plant extracts of Tabernaemontana
divaricata were performed to detect the presence of various
phytochemicals including Alkaloids, Tannins, Reducing sugars,
Saponins, Gums, Steroids, Triterpenoids, Flavonoids and Proteins
[25,26]. Table 1 indicates overall result of phytochemical analysis
Tabernaemontana divaricata plant.
Test for alkaloids
2 mL solution of the extract and 0.2 mL of dilute hydrochloric
acid were taken in a test tube. Then 1 mL of Mayer’s reagent was
added. Yellow colour precipitate was not formed and that was
indicated as the absence of alkaloids.
Tests for tannins
5 mL solution of the extract was taken in a test tube. Then 1
mL of 5% Ferric chloride solution was added. Greenish black
precipitate was formed and indicated the presence of tannins.
Tests for reducing sugar
0.5 mL of aqueous extract of the plant material was taken in a
test tube. 5 mL of Benedict’s solution was added to the test tube,