Medicinal uses, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre: A review

Abstract
Ethnopharmacological relevance
Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre is one of the many plants with diverse medicinal properties where all its parts have been used as traditional medicine in the treatment and prevention of several kinds of ailments in many countries such as for treatment of piles, skin diseases, and wounds.

Aim of this review
This review discusses the current knowledge of traditional uses, phytochemistry, biological activities, and toxicity of this species in order to reveal its therapeutic and gaps requiring future research opportunities.

Material and methods
This review is based on literature study on scientific journals and books from library and electronic sources such as ScienceDirect, PubMed, ACS, etc.

Results
Several different classes of flavonoid derivatives, such as flavones, flavans, and chalcones, and several types of compounds including terpenes, steroid, and fatty acids have been isolated from all parts of this plant. The pharmacological studies revealed that various types of preparations, extracts, and single compounds of this species exhibited a broad spectrum of biological activities such as antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and anti-diabetic activities.

Conclusion
The results of several toxicity studies indicated that extracts and single compounds isolated from this species did not show any significant toxicity and did not cause abnormality on some rats' organs. Thus, this plant has a potential to be used as an effective therapeutic remedy due to its low toxicity towards mammalian cells. However, further study on chemical constituents and their mechanisms in exhibiting certain biological activities are needed to understand the full phytochemical profile and the complex pharmacological effects of this plant. In addition, further study on the toxicity of the other compounds isolated from this plant required to be assessed to ensure their eligibility to be used as sources of drugs.

Graphical abstract

Download : Download high-res image (327KB)Download : Download full-size image

Introduction
Fabaceae is one of the largest families of flowering plants, comprising over 714 genera (Lewis et al., 2005). The name Fabaceae is valid for family sensu lato (s.l.) with Leguminosae as the alternate name (Singh, 2004). The family is economically very important being the major source of food and forage and its great diversity (the third largest family in flowering plants) has also attracted much interest in ecological as well as systematic studies (Acharya et al., 2004). Pongamia pinnata is one of the important species from this family. According to Bala et al. (2011), Pongamia pinnata is the sole species in genus Pongamia. From a botanical point of view, it should be noted that the nomenclature of the genus is particularly confusing because many species of other genera are synonymous. This plant is also well known as Millettia pinnata (L.) Panigrahi, Pongamia glabra Vent., and Derris indica (Lam.) Bennet (Bala et al., 2011, Scott et al., 2008; http://www.theplantlist.org). In some countries, Pongamia pinnata has various common names, such as karanja (Hindi, Bengali, Sanskrit), ki pahang laut (Indonesian), kacang kayu laut (Malay), and pongam oil tree/malva nut (English) (Csurhes and Hankamer, 2010).

Pongamia pinnata is a multipurpose legume tree indigenous to the Indian subcontinent, south East Asia and one of the non-edible oil yielding tree with high potential for seed yield (~20,000 seeds/tree) (Belide et al., 2010). It is drought resistant, nitrogen-fixing leguminous tree known to withstand water logging and mild frost, with high tolerance to salinity. It is also well adapted to adverse climatic conditions and soil moisture conditions (Rout et al., 2009). It is grown as shade tree and wind break in tea plantation (Divakara et al., 2010). Pongamia pinnata is a potential source for biodiesel due to its oil contained in its seeds (Pandey et al., 2010, Azam et al., 2005, Ukey et al., 2008).

All parts of this plant have been widely used as traditional medicine to treat a broad spectrum of diseases and wounds. It has been more than 80 years since the first study of this species conducted by Prof. Limaye in 1925. His study about the chemical properties of Pongamia pinnata resulted in the isolation of karanjin, a furanoflavone which becomes a trademark compound of this species. Since then, vast amount of studies have been done by international researchers, especially from India and China, following the information about the medicinal properties possessed by this plant mostly according to Indian traditional medical practitioners which are reported in Ayurvedic medicinal system. The phytochemical studies resulted in the discovery of large amount of compounds from various classes including flavonoids and terpenoids. The pharmacological studies revealed that this plant demonstrated a broad range of biological activities. This review reveals and describes the phytochemistry of this species and the pharmacological effects of its various extracts and chemical constituents, including the antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-parasite, anti-inflammatory, anti-convulsant, anti-diabetic, anti-hyperammnonemic, cytotoxicity, anthelminthic, insecticidal and immunomodulatory activities. Besides, this review also discusses the toxicity of this species which gives some information that no toxicity or abnormality caused by the administration of some the extracts and single compounds on the organs of the animal samples. However, further study on chemical constituents and their mechanisms in exhibiting certain biological activities are needed to understand the full phytochemical profile and the complex pharmacological effects of this plant. In addition, further clinical studies on the toxicity of all the plant parts extracts and the other compounds isolated from this plant are required to ensure their eligibility to be used as sources of drugs.

Section snippets
Medicinal properties
Pongamia pinnata has been applied as crude drug for the treatment of tumors, piles, skin diseases, and ulcers (Rout et al., 2009, Pavithra et al., 2010). The root is effective for treating gonorrhea, cleaning gums, teeth, and ulcers, and is used in vaginal and skin diseases (Muthu et al., 2006). Table 1 describes the medicinal uses of all parts of this species.

The seed oil is of various uses, especially for the treatment of ulcers, rheumatism, leucoderma and scabies (Nadkarni, 1954; Kirtikar

Phytochemistry
Fig. 1 The phytochemical studies of Pongamia pinnata resulted in the isolation of flavonoid derivatives (flavones, flavans, and chalcones). Several compounds from other classes were also detected in this species, such as a sesquiterpene, diterpene, triterpenes, steroids, amino acid derivatives, disaccharide, fatty acids, and esters.

Pharmacology
Wide traditional uses of Pongamia pinnata have led scientists to investigate its pharmacological properties and to validate the uses of this species as therapeutic remedy. Several studies revealed that this plant exhibited various pharmacological activities such as antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-parasite, anti-inflammatory, anti-convulsant, anti-diabetic, anti-hyperammnonemic, cytotoxicity, anthelminthic, and insecticidal activities (Table 6, Table 7).

Conclusion
Pongamia pinnata has been widely used as traditional medicine in several countries, especially India. All parts of this plant possess medicinal properties and are used to treat skin diseases, piles, ulcers, diabetes, rheumatism, tumors, and wounds. Phytochemical investigation revealed that a large number of flavonoid derivatives and several miscellaneous compounds from different classes have been isolated from this species. The flavonoid derivatives, which are predominated by flavones, flavans
