Pungai (Millettia Pinnata) Benefits, Medicinal Uses

Pungai is a herbal medicine used in Ayurveda and Siddha which predominantly is used in treating skin diseases. It is a species of tree in the pea family, Fabaceae, native to eastern and tropical Asia, Australia and Pacific islands.

Scientific name of pungai is millettia pinnata. Common names include Indian beech and Pongam oiltree.

Pungai is bitter, pungent, astringent in taste, easy to digest, has piercing and hot potency qualities. The fruits, leaves, stem bark, root bark, seeds and twigs are used in medicinal preparation.

It is widely used in managing constipation as it helps to improve gut motility and has a laxative property. It might also be used for piles due to its astringent and anti-inflammatory properties.

Pungai oil is also useful in arthritis due to its anti-inflammatory activity. Regularly bathing with Pungai leaf infusion helps to manage pain and inflammation. Pungai stem has been used for cleaning teeth and strengthen gums since ancient times.

According to Ayurveda, Pungai oil is mainly applied on the skin to manage boils and eczema as well as heal wounds due to its Ropan (healing) and antimicrobial property. The paste of its leaves can also be applied on cuts and wounds to help promote healing.

Pungai | Millettia Pinnata Benefits and Medicinal Uses
1. Indigestion
Pungai is helpful in treating indigestion, the state of incomplete process of digestion. It is caused due to aggravated Kapha which causes weak digestive fire. This herb helps to promote digestive fire due to its hot potency and supports food digestion.

Tips:
Take ¼ to ½ teaspoon of Pungai powder. Take it with after meals twice a day for managing indigestion.

 

2. Appetite loss
Pungai helps to promote appetite when added to the diet. Loss of appetite is caused due to weak digestion. It is due to aggravation of Vata, Pitta and Kapha doshas that leads to incomplete food digestion. This results insufficient secretion of gastric juice in stomach leading to loss of appetite. It stimulates digestion and promotes appetite due to appetizing property.

Tips:
Take ¼ to ½ teaspoon of Pungai powder. Take it after meals to improve appetite twice a day.

 

3. Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis is caused due to aggravation of Vata dosha. It causes swelling, pain and difficulty in moving. Karanja possess Vata balancing property and provides relief from symptoms of osteoarthritis such as pain and swelling in joints.

Tips:
Take ¼ to ½ teaspoon of pungai powder. After meals take it twice a day to provide relief from osteoarthritis symptoms.

 

4. Cough and cold
It is helpful in managing cough and cold especially whooping cough which is due to Kapha balancing property. It helps to melt thick mucus due to hot potency. It also eliminates mucus from the lungs and provides relief from cough.

Tips:
Take ¼ to ½ teaspoon of pungai powder mixed with honey twice a day after meals.

 

5. Skin disorders
It’s oil is used for treating skin disorders such as abscess, boils and eczema with its antiseptic and healing properties.

Tips:
Apply 3-5 drops of pungai oil mixed with coconut oil 1 to 2 times a day on affected area. Repeat this till one get relief from symptoms of skin disorders.

 

6. Treat piles
It’s oil helps to manage swelling and inflammation of pile mass when applied externally which is due to its healing properties.

Tips:
Apply the mixture of pungai oil (3-5 drops) and coconut oil to the pile mass once or twice a day after clearing the bowel.

 

7. Arthritis
Pungai oil helps to lower pain and also improves healing on rheumatic arthritis and psoriatic arthritis when externally applied due to its hot and healing potency.

 

8. Pain in joints
Apply it’s oil to affected area for lowering bone and joint pain. Due to its Vata balancing property, it helps to lower joint pain.

Tips:
Massage with 3-5 drops of pungai oil mixed with Sesame oil. Repeat this to get a complete relief.

 

9. Ulcer
The root juice helps to heal sinus ulcer due to its healing property.

Tips:
Massage with the mixture of 3-5 drops of pungai oil with coconut oil. Repeat this for quick healing.

 

10. Heal wounds
It’s oil helps to heal the wounds quickly, lowers swelling and provides normal skin texture. It is helpful for skin problems such as cuts due to its healing property.

Tips:
Apply the mixture of 3-5 drops of pungai oil and coconut oil. Massage with this mixture on affected area.

How to Use Pungai?
1. Pungai Oil
a. Take 3-5 drops of Pungai oil and mix with coconut oil.

b. Apply on the affected area 1-2 times a day to get rid of boils, eczema and other skin infections.

 

2. Pungai Powder
a. Take ½-1 teaspoon of Pungai powder.

b. Add honey to it and apply on the affected area.

c. Wait for 10-15 minutes.

d. Wash thoroughly with tap water.

e. Use this remedy once a day to control fungal infections.

 

3. A poultice of paste Pungai leaves
a. Make a poultice (substances that is wrapped in a piece of cloth, heated and placed on the skin) of paste Pungai leaves.

b. Apply on the affected area 1-2 times a day.

c. Repeat to get relief from pain and swelling.