Moutarde de Chine (Brassica juncea), un subtil piquant en salade

Chinese mustard (Brassica juncea), also called brown mustard, oriental mustard or Indian mustard, is a biennial herbaceous plant native to Central Asia, the Himalayan region, then it spread to China, India and in the Caucasus. Its ability to withstand the winter cold is very interesting.
Chinese mustard has yellow flowers in a cross
Its young shoots and leaves have a subtle spicy pungent flavor inherited from its parent, black mustard (Brassica nigra). When young, the leaves are eaten fresh in salads, like arugula (Eruca sativa), or sautéed in a wok, like Chinese cabbage, when they are stronger in taste.
Chinese mustard grows very quickly. It has a deep white tuberous root, a bushy habit from a rosette with alternate, elongated, more or less serrated leaves, distributed on the stems which can reach 1m in height when their ends are adorned with clusters of bright yellow flowers. with 4 petals in a cross.
Subsequently, flowering gives way to pods that contain small round seeds like those that are visible in old-fashioned mustard. If you let a few feet go to seed, spontaneous sowing will offer you new Asian salads.
Chinese mustard has the property of absorbing heavy metals through its roots, which explains why it is used in operations to decontaminate soils rich in heavy metals (phytoremediation).
Family: Brassicaceae
Type: biennial herbaceous
Origin: Asia
Color: green or red leaves
Sowing: yes
Cutting: no
Planting: March to April then mid-July to mid-September
Flowering: April-May
Harvest: 2 to 3 months after sowing, then all winter
Height: up to 1 m
Ideal soil and exposure for Chinese mustard
Chinese mustard is grown in the sun in rich, deep, cool, loose and draining soil.
Chinese mustard seedlings (Brassica juncea)
China mustard sowing date
Sowing is done either in March-April or between mid-July and mid-September, burying the seeds at 1cm, every 3cm approximately, which will then require thinning out to 30cm. Rows should be 25cm apart.
Council of maintenance and culture of Chinese mustard
Chinese mustard needs to have its soil constantly cool: it must therefore be watered regularly in hot weather, otherwise it will go to seed quickly. To maintain the freshness, a mulch is welcome.
Harvesting, storing and using Chinese mustard
The harvest of the 10 to 20cm long leaves which are used to spice up the winter salad, in mescluns, begins about 2 to 3 months after sowing, it is done as and when needed, without touching the heart to take advantage regrowth, until about March, when the fleshy flower stalks develop. When the Chinese mustard is frozen, do not touch it or pick it, wait for the leaves to come back to life with a rise in temperature.
The leaves, once picked, keep for a short time in the refrigerator, like salad.
However, before reaching the flowering stage, it is possible to eat the tender shoots with fine buds, reminiscent of small broccoli, which can be eaten raw or steamed or wok-cooked.
Diseases, pests and parasites of Chinese mustard
Chinese mustard does not escape the faults of the Brassicaceae: it fears attacks by flea beetles, mildew, powdery mildew and even cabbage clubroot, not to mention slugs.
Location and favorable association of Chinese mustard
It is a plant that benefits from being grown near potatoes, which it protects against diseases.
Chinese mustard (Brassica juncea) with red leaves
Recommended species and varieties of Brassica for growing in the garden
The genus Brassica has many species including all those of the large cabbage family. With regard to Chinese mustard, many varieties have been developed for European cultivation, offering a range of colours, shapes and tastes, among which we can mention 'Green in Snow' with green leaves, very resistant to cold, 'Red Giant ' with leaves tinged with red, very tasty, 'Bloody Mary' with red leaves and a less subtle taste, 'Golden Streaks' and 'Red Streaks' with very finely cut leaves, respectively green and red… Tuberous mustard (Brassica juncea 'napiformis ') is very close to the turnip since it produces a top-shaped root which is eaten cooked like a turnip or raw like radishes; it is harvested from mid-September to the first frosts, but finding seeds to grow them is impossible.