WHITE MUSTARD

Other Name(s):
American Yellow Mustard, Bai Jie Zi, Brassica alba, Farine de Moutarde Blanche, Graine de Moutarde Blanche, Huile de Moutarde Blanche, Mostaza Blanca, Moutarde, Moutarde Anglaise, Moutarde Blanche, Moutarde Cultivée, Moutarde Rude, Mustard, Pâte de Moutarde Blanche, Plâtre de Moutarde Blanche, Poudre de Moutarde Blanche, Sinapis alba, Weibe Senfsamen, White Mustard Flour, White Mustard Greens, White Mustard Oil, White Mustard Paste, White Mustard Plaster, White Mustard Powder, White Mustard Seed, Yellow Mustard.
OVERVIEW
White mustard is an herb. The seeds are used to make medicine.
People take white mustard for “clearing the voice,” preventing infection, causing vomiting, increasing urine flow (as a diuretic) to relieve water retention, and increasing the appetite.
Some people apply white mustard directly to the affected area for cough and colds, chest congestion, bronchitis, swollen joints, arthritis-like pain (rheumatism), osteoarthritis, back pain (lumbago), and sore mouth and throat. It is sometimes used in a bath to treat paralysis.
In foods, white mustard is one of three types of mustard typically used to make mustard condiment. Black mustard (Brassica nigra) is the most pungent. White mustard (Brassica alba) is the most mild and is used to make traditional American yellow mustard. Brown mustard (Brassica juncea) is dark yellow, has a pungent taste, and is used to make Dijon mustard. It is easier to harvest the brown mustard seed than the black mustard seed, so many mustard condiments now contain brown mustard seed instead of black mustard seed.
How does it work?
There isn't enough information available to know how white mustard works.
SIDE EFFECTS
White mustard is safe when consumed as food. But there is not enough scientific information available to know if it is safe when used as a medicine that is taken by mouth or applied to the skin.
Applying white mustard to the skin for an extended period of time can cause burns, blisters, and ulcers.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS & WARNINGS
Pregnancy and breast-feeding: It’s UNSAFE to use white mustard in medicinal amounts if you are pregnant. There is some evidence it might start your menstrual period and cause a miscarriage.
There isn’t enough information to know whether it’s safe to use white mustard in medicinal amounts if you are breast-feeding. Play it safe and stick to food amounts.
DOSING
The appropriate dose of white mustard depends on several factors such as the user's age, health, and several other conditions. At this time there is not enough scientific information to determine an appropriate range of doses for white mustard. Keep in mind that natural products are not always necessarily safe and dosages can be important. Be sure to follow relevant directions on product labels and consult your pharmacist or physician or other healthcare professional before using.