Phytochemical Composition and Antioxidant Potential of Brassica

Abstract
The edible parts of Brassica plants are a rich source of phytochemical compounds which possess strong antioxidant potential. These plants contain a variety of phytochemical compound including phenolics, polyphenols, phenolic acids, flavonoids, carotenoids (zeaxanthin, lutein, β-carotene), alkaloids, phytosterols chlorophyll, glucosinolates, terpenoids, and glycosides. These plants possess strong antioxidant potential in terms of metal reducing, metal chelating, lipid reducing and free radical scavenging activities. These also have a positive effect on the activity of antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, catalase, and ascorbate peroxidase. Among various species of genus Brassica studied for their phytochemical composition and antioxidant activity, Brassica oleracea leaves, florets and seeds have better phytochemical and antioxidant profile. Brassica juncea, Brassica napus, Brassica rapa and Brassica nigra are also the phytochemical and antioxidant rich species of genus Brassica. The phytochemical profile and antioxidant potential of Brassica plants make them the preferable candidates for nutritional and pharmaceutical applications.
1. Introduction
Brassica is a genus of plants family Cruciferae also called Brassicaceae which consists of about 350 genera and almost 3500 species. Brassica is the most important of all the genera of this family. Most of the species this genus have worldwide importance due to their economic, nutritional, medicinal, and pharmaceutical value. These species are cultivated as vegetables, oilseed crops, animal forage and medicinal herbs throughout the world. Oilseed crops of Brassica produce 14% of the world’s vegetable oil, the third most important source of edible oil after soybean and palm.
Phytochemical content
The major phytochemical compounds quantitatively estimated in various species of Brassica include phenolics, flavonoids, ascorbic acid (Vit. C) glucosinolates, carotenoids, and tocopherols. Tables 2 and 3 present the phytochemical content (total phenolic content: TPC, total flavonoid content: TFC, ascorbic acid content: AAC, total glucosinolate content: TGC, total carotenoid content: TCC, and total tocopherol content: TTC) of various extracts of some edible parts of commonly used Brassica species. The aqueous and organic extracts of the various parts of Brassica plants have been found to contain the considerable amounts of phenolics, flavonoids, carotenoids, ascorbic acid, and tocopherols which advocate the suitability of Brassica plants for pharmaceutical applications. Among Brassica species, B. oleracea var. Capitata,B. oleracea var. Italica, and B. juncea, B. rapa are high in phenolics, flavonoids and carotenoids.
Antioxidant potential
Antioxidants are the compounds which prevent the oxidation of the biomolecules by reducing the oxidizing agents and being self-oxidized. These compounds have the ability to scavenge the free radicals produced during the redox reactions occurring in the living and nonliving systems and prevent the free radical chain reactions. In this way, the antioxidant compounds minimize the oxidative stress and prevent the oxidative damage to food materials and living organisms. Brassica plants are known to possess antioxidant properties due to the presence of antioxidant phytochemicals mainly the polyphenols, flavonoids and ascorbic acid. Most of these phytochemical compounds act as antioxidants due to their hydrogen donating and reducing abilities. Polyphenols are the phytochemicals which act as metal ion chelators and interfere with oxidation reactions including lipid peroxidation by donating the proton to free radicals. Phenoxy radicals are relatively stable to stop the oxidation chain reaction. Therefore, they stop the initiation of new oxidation chain reaction and terminate the propagation routs by capturing free radicals [26]. Polyphenols are used for the treatment of hypertension, vascular fragility, allergies and hypercholesterolemia due to their antimicrobials, antiulcer, antidiarrheal, and anti-inflammatory activities. Flavonoids possess metal ion chelating and free radical scavenging potential [27]. These phytochemicals comprise a vast antioxidant, antiproliferative and inhibitory action on inflammatory cells especially mast cells. Ascorbic acid is a water-soluble vitamin which possesses strong antioxidant potential and protects against oxidative damage.
The antioxidant activities of various extracts of some edible parts of commonly used Brassica species are presented in Tables 4 and 5. The Brassica plants have been found to possess metal reducing, metal chelating, lipid reducing and free radical scavenging activities [24, 28, 29, 30]. These also possess antioxidant enzyme activities as these have been found to enhance the activities of some antioxidant enzymes including glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, catalase, heme oxygenase and ascorbate peroxidase [21, 31, 32, 33] (Table 6). B. oleracea plants have been studied most for their antioxidant activities among the Brassica species and found to possess strong antioxidant potential in terms of reducing power and free radical scavenging capacity. The strong antioxidant potential of Brassica plants highlights their medicinal and therapeutic importance.