Mustasa Brassica juncea (L.) Cern.

Botany
Mustasa is an erect, branched, smooth annual, 0.4 to 1 meter high. Leaves are oblong-obovate to oblong-lanceolate, 5 to 15 centimeters long, or in some cultivated forms much larger, thin, irregularly toothed or subentire, the lower ones sometimes lobed or pinnatifid. Flowers are yellow, 6 to 8 millimeters long. Pod is ascending, linear-lanceolate, 1.5 to 3 centimeters long, and somewhat contracted between the seeds. Beak is seedless.

Distribution
Widely distributed in the settled areas, in towns and houses, planted and spontaneous.
Introduced from Asia.
Now, pantropic; also occurring in some temperate regions.
Properties
• Pure mustard oil is pale yellow, faintly smelling of mustard with a shard and pungent taste.
• Counterirritant, emmenagogue, rubefacient.
• Considered analgesic, antibacterial, antifungal, diuretic, emetic, galatagogue, stimulant.

Parts utilized
· Seeds, leaves, oil.

Uses
Nutritional
Leaves eaten as green leafy vegetable, fresh or pickled in brine; also used in soups and stews.
Excellent source of calcium, phosphorus, iron and vitamin B.
Folkloric
Plaster applied to skin is a powerful irritant, rubefacient, and vesicant.
Applied to unbroken skin, it acts as a counterirritant, producing a sensation of warmth followed by burning pain. Leaves applied externally for pleurodynia and pleuritis, neuralgia, lumbago.
As a plaster, mustard soothes the pain in gastralgia, colic, neuralgia, lumbago. Also, applied over the epigastrium for hiccupping and vomiting. A plaster over the nape of the neck applied to relieve cerebral congestion.
Hot-foot bath of mustard (seeds or leaves) for headaches, common cold, and fevers.
Leaves applied to the forehead for headaches.
Hip-bath of mustard used as emmenagogue.
Poultice of mustard leaves or seeds used for neuralgic and rheumatic complaints.
Pure fresh oil taken from seeds used as stimulant and external counterirritant; applied externally for sore throats, internal congestion, and chronic muscular rheumatism.
Oil used as embrocation applied to skin in eruptions and ulcers.
Seeds used as poultice in gout and inflammation.
Combined oil of mustard and camphor used for muscle pains,
As an emetic, 4-5 tsp in a cup of warm water.
Taken internally as condiment, causes a sense of warmth in the stomach, stimulates gastric juice, sharpens the appetite and assists in digestion. In large doses, becomes a gastric irritant, and causes vomiting; as such, used as an emetic in narcotic poisoning.
In Bhutan, aerial parts used as spasmolytic and for treatment of food poisoning, heart and blood disorders. (23).
In Nepal, seed oil rubbed for body aches.
In Bangladesh, oil is rubbed on the throat and chest for treatment of common colds with mucus.
In Java, used as antisyphilitic emmenagogue.
In China, leaves in soup for bladder, inflammation and hemorrhage.
In India, leaves used for diabetes. Plant used as anthelmintic, and in treament of alopecia, epilepsy, snakebites, hiccups, and toothache.
In Maharashtra, India, a paste of alum (white mineral sal) and Brassica seeds eaten along with banana twice daily for the treatment of jaundice.

