Indian Mustard (Brassica juncea L.) Seeds in Health

Botanical Descriptions
Brassica juncea L. belongs to the mustard family (Brassicaceae or Cruciferae) and has numerous common names used, e.g., brown mustard, Chinese mustard, or oriental mustard. The leaves with ovate or obovate shape are simple and petioled; the flowers of the raceme inflorescences are bisexual with four free sepals and four yellow petals, along with two longer and two shorter stamens. In China “brown mustard” includes the hybrids of Brassica nigra and other Brassica species that have brown seeds, while “oriental mustard” has yellow ones.

This annual herb originates from natural hybridization between black mustard (Brassica nigra L. Koch) and turnip mustard (Brassica rapa L.) and retained the whole genome of both parents, therefore it is amphidiploid.8 This species has got many subspecies and varieties such as varietas juncea, gracilis, or rugosa.1,9 Although it is widespread in Europe, Africa, North America, and Asia, several authors believe that Eastern India, the Caucasus, and China are the main genetic centers for Brassica juncea.10–12
Strategies for Increasing the Production of Oilseed on a Sustainable Basis
Rameshwer Dass Gupta, Surinder Kumar Gupta, in Breeding Oilseed Crops for Sustainable Production, 2016

Use of Inorganic Fertilizers and Biofertilizers
Indian mustard is responsive to chemical fertilizers. In view of the escalating prices of chemical fertilizers, there is dire need for alternative sources of nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers, especially biofertilizers. Nonsymbiotic bacteria such as Azotobacter and Azospirillum are potential biofertilizers which could replace nitrogenous fertilizers as a result of phosphate-dissolving bacteria replacing phosphatic fertilizers. Interaction between biofertilizers and N levels was found to be significant on the sandy loam soil of Gurgaon (Haryana), which revealed that an inoculated crop receiving 30 kg N ha–1 gave a grain yield equivalent to 60 kg ha–1 (Mandal et al., 2002). Similar results were obtained with Azotobacter inoculation at Hisar (Haryana).

High-throughput sequencing in medicinal plant transcriptome studies
Da Cheng Hao, ... Pei Gen Xiao, in Medicinal Plants, 2015

2.3.2.3 Inflorescence
Brassica juncea (AABB) is an allotetraploid species containing genomes of B. rapa (AA) and B. nigra (BB). It is a major oilseed crop and medicinal plant in South Asia and China. B. juncea has two well-defined gene pools—Indian and east European. Hybrids between the two gene pools are heterotic for yield. A large number of qualitative and quantitative traits need to be introgressed from one gene pool to the other. SNPs are available from RNA-Seq-generated contigs and are useful for general mapping, fine mapping of selected regions, and comparative arrangement of gene blocks on B. juncea A and B genomes (Paritosh et al., 2014). RNA isolated from two lines of B. juncea—Varuna (Indian type) and Heera (east European type)—was sequenced using Illumina paired-end sequencing technology and assembled using the Velvet de novo program. A and B genome-specific contigs were identified in two steps. 135,693 SNPs were recorded in the assembled partial gene models of Varuna and Heera, 85,473 in the A genome, and 50,236 in the B. Using KASPar technology, 999 markers were added to an earlier intron polymorphism marker-based map of a B. juncea Varuna × Heera DH population. Many new gene blocks were identified in the B genome. A number of SNP markers covered single-copy homoeologues of the A and B genomes, and these were used to identify homoeologous blocks between the two genomes. Comparison of the block architecture of A and B genomes revealed extensive differences in gene block associations and block fragmentation patterns. Sufficient SNP markers are available for general- and specific-region fine mapping of crosses between lines of two diverse B. juncea gene pools, supporting the hypothesis that the two genomes evolved from independent hexaploid events.

Modern Methods in Natural Products Chemistry
9.16.5.2.1(i) Samples and reference compounds
Canola-quality Brassica juncea (condiment mustard) cv AC Vulcan, canola Brassica napus cv AV, and Sapphire broccoli seeds (Brassica oleracea cv italica) were used in these experiments. Sapphire broccoli sprouts were grown in the laboratory and commercial ‘brassica’ sprouts were obtained from a local supplier. Pure glucosinolate reference compounds were purified by ion-exchange chromatography and combined to form a standard mix for LC-ESI-MS. Glucosinolates were isolated from the following sources: glucoerucin from Rocket seeds (Eruca sativa); glucosinalbin from white mustard seeds (Sinapsis alba); glucotropaeolin from garden cress (Lepidium sativum); glucoiberin, glucoraphanin, and neoglucobrassicin from broccoli seeds (B. oleracea cv italica).