Mustard as Medicinal Plant: Sources, Botanical Features, Genetics and Applications

Abstract
Mustard as the medicinal plant used for the treatment of various diseases. There are 3 types of mustard: brown, oriental
and yellow. Generally, the mustard seeds are mainly used in condiment or food industries in either oil or seeds form. The
mustard plant is a plant species belongs to family Brassicaceae and the genera Brassica. The seed of mustard is used as spice.
Derivatives of mustard constituent‟s allyl iso-thiocyanate form basis for deadly agents such as anti-neoplastic drugs (e.g.
bendamustine) and mustard gases. It helps for karyotyping process that centered on meiotic and mitotic chromosome and
used many methods of staining comprising CMA3/DAPI fluorescence staining, Giemsa staining, silver staining, C
banding, and fluorescence in situ hybridization with repetitive DNA sequences. As a source of vitamin-K plays its
important role in serving with the blood clotting. It is also important and essential for the health of bone and heart. All
these mustard species can also be utilized in the production of eatable oils. Both oriental and brown mustards are utilized
to make the products which are spicier than the condiments which obtained from yellow mustard.
Keywords: Mustard plant, role, biochemical applications, chemical composition, genetics.

INTRODUCTION
The mustard plant is a plant species belongs to
family Brassicaceae and the genera Brassica and Sinapis.
The seed of mustard is used as spice. The seeds are
grinded and mixed with vinegar, water and other liquids
makes a yellowish colored condiment which is known as
prepared mustard. The green leaves of mustard are used
as vegetable and by pressing its seeds we obtain mustard
oil.
Mustard is a short growing season crop and it
is cultivated in cool crop period. Its seedlings are most
tolerant to the mildly frosts but the serious frost
conditions effects hardly. During reduction stage,

humidity stress caused by the dry and hot conditions
frequently causes lowered yield [1,2,3,4].
The seeds, leaves, and the seeds oil is used in
many medicines. Derivatives of mustard constituent‟s
allyl iso-thiocyanate form basis for deadly agents such as
anti-neoplastic drugs (e.g. bendamustine) and mustard
gases. Mustard is used in flavoring of food, as fodder, as
diuretic and an emetic, and also used in treatment of
inflammatory infections such as rheumatism and arthritis.
Mustard plant has potential pharmacological properties in
the cardiac diseases, diabetes and cancer; though, there
are partial clinical tribunals to support its use for any of
suggestion [5,6,7,8].
There are some side effects of mustard. If
someone takes greater amount of seeds of black
mustard by mouth can greatly damage the throat and
many other serious side effects like diarrhea, breathing
difficulties, heart failure, coma, drowsiness and also
death. When it is applied to skin, particularly for long
time, the black mustard cause damage of skin and skin
blisters. Brown mustard is an important crop as it is a
source of vegetable oil and it is related to the rapeseed
and is cultivated in Pakistan, India, Kazakhstan and
southern Russia for this purpose. Oil from its seeds has
great values as it is used in many foods and in many
animal feeding and human feed industries [9,10].
Sources of Mustard Plant
There are 3 types of mustard: brown, oriental
and yellow. Generally, the mustard seeds are mainly
used in condiment or food industries in either oil or
seeds form. Yellow mustard is mildest of three and also
has very low content of oil. It is frequently used in
production of “mild” prepared mustard for the table
usage but also used as dry mustard in mayonnaise,
dressings, sauces and salads. The flour obtained from
the yellow mustard is a good stabilizing and
emulsifying agent and it is used as stabilizer and
emulsifier in prepared meats. Oriental and brown
mustard are mainly used as “hot” table mustard and also
for spices and for oil. The flowers and leaves of brown
mustard plant are consumed as salad greens [11, 12].
Brassica carinata A. Braun., which is known as
the Abyssinian or Ethiopian mustard, a local traditional
vegetable of Africa and it is grown in Ethiopian
uplands. It is believed to be an amphidiploid among
Brassica oleracea and Brassica nigra. For its seeds it is
sown during spring in New Zealand and
Canterbury[13]. The plant is extensively used as a bio
fumigant, to overwhelm soil borne pathogens and pests
and due to this reason it is cultivated as rotation crop inNew Zealand and Australia. It is native to Eurasia and
Southeast Asia, commonly cultivated in temperate
northern areas comprising northern Asia, Korea, Japan,
Scandinavia, Russia and Northern China. In Australia,
Brassica napus inhabited in New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, and Western Australia, and Southern
Island territories of Canterbury and Marlborough in
New Zealand. In Australia, napus (coleseed or rape) and
naprobrassica L. are two maximum grown varieties and
frequently used as fodder, in medicines and in the
production of oil from them. In New Zealand and
Australia Brassica napus is extensively used in soups,
stews and as aromatic constituent [14].
Genetics of Mustard
The evolutionary relations between these
species of Brassica are described by what is called the
'triangle of U' model 2, which suggests how genome of
three ancestral species of Brassica, Brassica oleracae,
Brassica rapa, and Brassica nigra joined to give-rise the
allopolyploid species of this genus. By hybridization of
Brassica nigra and Brassica rapa diploid ancestors, and
followed by the spontaneous doubling of chromosomes
the Brassica juncea is formed. Succeeding varying
selection then to give-rise the oil use and vegetables
sub-varieties of Brassica juncea. For the study of
cytogenetic, karyotyping is a best tool, which showed
the characteristics and chromosomes number and it can
be used to clarify the ploidy, phylogenetic relationship
and origin between plant species. Numerous karyotypes
issued for the Brassica species, commonly related to
Brassica napus, Brassica oleracea and Brassica rapa that
are of chief agronomic attention. In earlier
investigations, karyotyping was centered on meiotic and
mitotic chromosome and used many methods of
staining comprising CMA3/DAPI fluorescence staining,
Giemsa staining, silver staining, C banding, and FISH
(fluorescence in situ hybridization with repetitive DNA
sequences) [15,16,17,18,19,20].Uses/applications of Mustard
Excellent source of vitamin K
Both the cooked and raw mustard greens are
the major sources of vitamin-K, and provides 120
percent and 690 percent of DV per 1 teacup (56 g &
140 g), correspondingly. The vitamin-K play its
important role in serving with the blood clotting. It is
also important and essential for the health of bone and
heart [21, 22].
Rich in disease-fighting antioxidants
The antioxidants are natural compounds
obtained from plants which gives protection against the
oxidative stresses that are caused due to excessive
amount of the free radicals. These radicals are
unbalanced molecules and can harm your cells. Many
of the researches advocates that with the passage of
time, this injury can lead to the serious diseases like
cancer, Alzheimer and heart diseases. Whereas the
levels of particular anti-oxidants vary among different
mustard green varieties, generally, these mustard greens
are the enriched source of anti-oxidants such as lutein,
flavonoids, vitamin E and C and beta carotenes[23, 24].
Other important uses
All these mustard species can also be utilized
in the production of eatable oils, and on the
subcontinent of India, the Brassica juncea seeds are
utilized in the production of 2nd most essential source of cooking oil[25-28]. Mustard plant is also a chief
source of best quality proteins, and after the withdrawal
of this oil, the remaining higher proteins meal can be
soaked in the water and then fed to the livestock. The
mustard plant leaves, called the mustard greens, and
these are utilized as food. Additionally, both the leaves
and seeds of mustard conventionally used for the
curative purpose, comprising the historic use as
remedial for common cold and utilization in cures for
chilblains, baths, and mustard plasters. The recent
researches on the mustard plant that have high oil
quality and quantity are used in the production of biodiesel, a renewable liquefied fuel which is similar to
diesel. The bio-diesel which is obtained from mustard
oil has noble cetane rating and cold flow properties. The
remaining meal after the extraction of oil used as an
effective pesticide [29-35].
Farmers choose the delayed flowering varieties
of mustard that do not produce the seeds; these may
developed into weeds in the succeeding years [36-39].
The early vigor is essential for quickly soil covering
and suppressed the weeds and also gives protection
against the erosion of soil. In rotations with the sugarbeets, the suppression of white-beet cyst-nematode is
important character. Resilient varieties of white mustard
reduce the population of nematode by 70 to 90 %. A
heritable relationship among the many mustard species,