Brassica juncea (mustard)

Abstract
This datasheet on Brassica juncea covers Identity, Overview, Distribution, Dispersal, Diagnosis, Biology & Ecology, Environmental Requirements, Natural Enemies, Impacts, Uses, Prevention/Control, Further Information.
Notes on Taxonomy and Nomenclature
Brassica juncea was classified by Linneaus as Sinapis juncea in 1753 in Species Plantarum 2. Shortly after, in 1769, Cranz changed this species to Raphanus junceus. Cosson and Czernajew placed it in the genus Brassica ninety years later in 1859. It is a hybrid of Brassica nigra and Brassica rapa, believed to have originated 10,000 years ago (OECD, 2016) and has multiple varieties. All of these varieties have a chromosome number of 2n = 36 and they can be readily crossed and produce fully fertile offspring (Flora of China, 2015).
The high levels of polymorphism and the number of cultivars developed has led to a confusing taxonomy with regards to subspecies and varieties. Spect and Diedrichsen (2001) define 4 subspecies: integrifolia, juncea, napiformis and taisai. Whereas Flora of China (2015) revised the 7 varieties and 3 species defined in Florae Reipublicae Popularis Sinicae (Cheo, 1987) into three varieties, juncea, napiformis and tumida. Most of the variation among varieties comes from the tremendous variation in basal leaf morphology of the species. All cultivars within these groups are used as vegetables, except for those of var. juncea, which is cultivated for its seeds and, less commonly, as animal feed.
Plant Type
Annual
Biennial
Herbaceous
Perennial
Seed propagated
Summary of Invasiveness
Brassica juncea has been distributed worldwide as a crop, and has escaped cultivation to become naturalized in fields, wasteland and roadsides as a weed. Seeds can persist in fields after harvesting and become a weed for subsequent crops. It is an invasive weed in Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the Americas, and many Pacific Islands, although it is not considered a significant weed in Canada. As some Brassica species use allelochemicals to inhibit other species and B. juncea extract has been shown to have a deleterious effect on sunflower germination and growth, this species could reduce local biodiversity.
Description
Flora of China (2015), describes the biology of B. juncea as follows:
Herbs annual, (20-)30-100(-180) cm tall, pubescent or rarely glabrous, glaucous or not, sometimes with fleshy taproots. Stems erect, branched above. Basal and lowermost cauline leaves long petiolate; petiole (1-)2-8(-15) cm; leaf blade ovate, oblong, or lanceolate in outline, (4-) 6-30(-80) × 1.5-15(-28) cm, lyrate-pinnatifid or pinnatisect; terminal lobe ovate, repand, dentate, or incised; lateral lobes 1-3 on each side of midvein, much smaller than terminal lobe, crisped incised, dentate, repand, or entire. Upper cauline leaves petiolate or subsessile, oblanceolate, oblong, lanceolate, or linear, to 10 × 5 cm, base cuneate to attenuate, margin entire or repand, rarely dentate. Fruiting pedicels straight, divaricate, (0.5-)0.8-1.5(-2) cm. Sepals oblong, (3.5-)4-6(-7) × 1-1.7 mm, spreading. Petals yellow, (6.5-)8-11(-13) × 5-7.5 mm, ovate or obovate, apex rounded or emarginate; claw 3-6 mm. Filaments 4-7 mm; anthers oblong, 1.5-2 mm. Fruit linear, (2-)3-5(-6) cm × 3-4(-5) mm, terete or slightly 4-angled, sessile, divaricate or ascending; valvular segment (1.5-)2-4.5 cm, 6-15(-20)-seeded per locule; valves with a prominent midvein, slightly torulose; terminal segment conical, (4-)5-10(-15) mm, seedless; style often obsolete. Seeds dark to light brown or grey, globose, 1-1.7 mm in diameter, minutely reticulate.
List of Pests
Major host of:
Bagrada hilaris (painted bug); Candidatus Phytoplasma trifolii (clover proliferation phytoplasma)
Minor host of:
Albugo candida (white rust of crucifers); Botryotinia fuckeliana (grey mould-rot); Erysiphe cruciferarum (powdery mildew of crucifers); Gibberella intricans (damping-off of safflower); Khuskia oryzae (cob rot of maize); Pieris brassicae (large cabbage white); Pieris rapae (cabbage white butterfly); Spodoptera litura (taro caterpillar)
Wild host of:
Tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (tomato spotted wilt)
Associated with (not a host):
Nysius vinitor (Rutherglen bug)
Host of (source-data mining):
Alternaria brassicae (dark spot of crucifers); Alternaria brassicicola (dark leaf spot of cabbage); Arion vulgaris (Spanish slug); Bemisia tabaci (tobacco whitefly); Botrytis cinerea (damping-off); Chromatomyia horticola (pea leaf miner); Crocidolomia pavonana (large cabbage-heart caterpillar); Croton yellow vein mosaic virus; Dysdercus cingulatus (red cotton stainer); Golovinomyces cichoracearum (powdery mildew); Hellula undalis (cabbage webworm); Leptosphaeria biglobosa; Liriomyza huidobrensis (serpentine leafminer); Liriomyza sativae (vegetable leaf miner); Myzus persicae (green peach aphid); Pieris canidia (small cabbage butterfly); Plasmodiophora brassicae (club root); Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola (bacterial: cabbage leaf spot); Pyrenopeziza brassicae (light leaf spot); Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (cottony soft rot); Tetranychus urticae (two-spotted spider mite); Thanatephorus cucumeris (many names, depending on host); Turnip yellows virus; Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (black rot)
Distribution
This species is distributed worldwide, except in northern and polar areas with an annual average temperature below 6°C. Its original distribution is believed to be between Eastern Europe and China, where the range of its parent species, Brassica nigra and Brassica rapa, overlap, with centres of diversity in central and western China, eastern India, Myanmar, and through Iran to the Near East. It has been cultivated for centuries in many parts of Eurasia. These days, the species is mainly grown in Bangladesh, Central Africa, China, India, Japan, Nepal and Pakistan, as well as southern Russia north of the Caspian Sea.
Similarities to Other Species/Conditions
This species is of hybrid origin. It closely resembles B. napus and B. rapa except that the upper leaves of these two species are clasping, while in B. juncea they are not. Brassica juncea seeds are very similar to those of Brassica niger, one of its parent species, both less than 2 mm in diameter, reddish-brown to brown or orange in colour. However, the seeds of B. juncea are more spherical than those of B. nigra, which are more oval or oblong. The seed texture varies, with B. juncea being defined by fine, distinct lines outlining flat-bottomed interspaces, while B. niger has thick, prominent ridges surrounding concave interspaces. B. juncea seeds have small, distinct stipples covering the entire seed, while the stipples on the seeds of B. niger are partially or completely obscured and may not be visible (Commercial Seed Analysts Association of Canada, 2010)
Habitat
This is a cultivated and naturalized species around the world. In the wild it is mainly found in fields, wasteland and roadsides as a weed.
Biology and Ecology
Genetics
Brassica juncea is a natural amphidiploid (AABB genome, 2n=36) hybrid of Brassica rapa (AA genome, 2n=20) and Brassica nigra (BB genome, 2n=16). Axelsson et al. (2000) used linkage mapping to show that the B. juncea genome has remained largely unchanged since the hybridization event and contains the conserved genomes of both progenitor species.
Reproductive Biology
This species is mainly self-pollinated, although 20-30% cross pollination has been recorded. This cross pollination can be the result of the raceme of different individuals touching. Although the major pollinator for the species seems to be bees due to the heavy and sticky nature of its pollen (Canadian Food Inspection Agency, 2008), at least 30 species of insect pollinators, belonging to ten families under four orders, were observed visiting brown mustard flowers in open pollinated and caged individuals in India, including the cabbage white butterfly (Pieris brassicae) (Kunjwal et al., 2014). In farmlands in Indonesia, three bee species were found to make up approximately 88% of the pollinators, but a diversity of Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera, Diptera and Coleoptera species were observed (Atmowidi et al., 2007).
Environmental Requirements
Brassica juncea grows worldwide from Boreal Wet to Tropical Thorn through Tropical Wet Forest Life Zones. It is reported to tolerate annual precipitation of 500 to 4200 mm, annual temperature of 6 to 27°C, and pH of 4.3 to 8.3.
