Mustard Greens: Nutrition Facts and Health Benefits

Mustard greens are peppery-tasting greens that come from the mustard plant (Brassica juncea L.) (1Trusted Source).
Also known as brown mustard, vegetable mustard, Indian mustard, and Chinese mustard, mustard greens are members of the Brassica genus of vegetables. This genus also includes kale, collard greens, broccoli, and cauliflower (2, 3Trusted Source).
There are several varieties, which are usually green and have a strong bitter, spicy flavor.
To make them more palatable, these leafy greens are typically enjoyed boiled, steamed, stir-fried, or even pickled.
This article provides a complete overview of mustard greens, including their nutrition, benefits, and uses.
Nutritional profile
Mustard greens are one of the most nutritious foods you can eat, as they’re low in calories yet rich in fiber and micronutrients (4Trusted Source).Additionally, mustard greens contain 4–5% of the DV for calcium, iron, potassium, riboflavin (vitamin B2), magnesium, and thiamine (vitamin B1), as well as small amounts of zinc, selenium, phosphorus, niacin (vitamin B3), and folate (4Trusted Source).
Compared with raw mustard greens, one cup (140 grams) of cooked mustard greens has much higher levels of vitamin A (96% of the DV), vitamin K (690% of the DV), and copper (22.7% of the DV). Yet, it’s lower in vitamins C and E (5Trusted Source).
Pickled mustard greens, often referred to as takana in Japanese and Chinese cuisines, are similar in calories, carbs, and fiber as raw mustard greens. But they do lose some nutrients during pickling, especially vitamin C (6Trusted Source).
However, one study found that pickling was an effective method for retaining important plant compounds with antioxidant properties (7Trusted Source).
Health benefits of mustard greens
There’s currently limited research on the specific benefits of eating mustard greens.
Still, the individual nutrients found in mustard greens — and Brassica vegetables in general — have been associated with numerous health benefitsRich in disease-fighting antioxidants
Antioxidants are naturally occurring plant compounds that help protect against oxidative stress caused by an excess of free radicals (8Trusted Source).
Free radicals are unstable molecules that can damage your cells. Research suggests that over time, this damage can lead to serious, chronic conditions, such as heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer’s disease (8Trusted Source, 9Trusted Source).
While levels of specific antioxidants vary between the different varieties of mustard greens, these leafy greens in general are a rich source of antioxidants like flavonoids, beta carotene, lutein, and vitamins C and E (1Trusted Source, 3Trusted Source, 4Trusted Source, 10Trusted Source).
Additionally, red varieties are rich in anthocyanins, which are red-purple pigments found in fruits and vegetables that have been linked to a reduced risk of heart disease, cancer, and type 2 diabetes (1Trusted Source, 11Trusted Source).
Overall, including mustard greens in your diet may help protect against diseases related to oxidative stress.Excellent source of vitamin K
Both raw and cooked mustard greens are a phenomenal source of vitamin K, providing 120% and 690% of the DV per one cup (56 grams and 140 grams), respectively (4Trusted Source, 5Trusted Source).
Vitamin K is best known for its vital role in helping with blood clotting. It’s also been shown to be essential for heart and bone health (12Trusted Source).
In fact, inadequate vitamin K has been linked to an increased risk of heart disease and osteoporosis, a condition that results in reduced bone strength and an increased risk of fractures (13Trusted Source, 14Trusted Source).
Recent studies have also suggested a link between vitamin K deficiency and brain health. Inadequate vitamin K may be associated with an increased risk of impaired brain functioning, dementia, and Alzheimer’s disease. However, more research is needed (15Trusted Source, 16Trusted Source).
May benefit heart health
Mustard greens may also be good for your heart.
They’re loaded with antioxidants like flavonoids and beta carotene, which have been associated with a reduced risk of developing and dying from heart disease (20Trusted Source, 21Trusted Source, 22Trusted Source).
One review of eight studies found that a high intake of leafy green Brassica vegetables is associated with a significant 15% reduced risk of heart disease (23Trusted Source).
As with other Brassica vegetables, mustard greens contain compounds that help bind bile acids in your digestive system. This is important, as preventing the reabsorption of bile acids leads to lowered cholesterol levels (24).
According to one test-tube study, steaming mustard greens significantly increases their bile acid binding effect. This suggests that steamed mustard greens may have greater cholesterol-lowering potential, compared with eating them raw (25Trusted Source).May be good for eye health
Among the antioxidants in mustard greens are lutein and zeaxanthin, which have been shown to benefit eye health (1Trusted Source, 4Trusted Source, 26Trusted Source, 27Trusted Source).
Specifically, these two compounds help protect your retina from oxidative damage, as well as filter out potentially harmful blue light (26Trusted Source, 27Trusted Source).
As a result, research suggests that eating foods rich in lutein and zeaxanthin may help protect against age-related macular degeneration, which is the leading cause of blindness worldwide (26Trusted Source).
May have anticancer effects
In addition to powerful antioxidants, which may have anticancer effects, mustard greens are high in a group of beneficial plant compounds called glucosinolates (1Trusted Source).
In test-tube studies, glucosinolates have been shown to help protect cells against DNA damage and prevent the growth of cancerous cells. However, these benefits haven’t been studied in humans (28Trusted Source).
Similarly, a test-tube study of mustard leaf extract found protective effects against colon and lung cancers. Still, studies in humans are needed (29Trusted Source).
As for research in humans, observational studies have shown a link between overall intake of Brassica vegetables — but not mustard greens specifically — and a reduced risk of certain types of cancers, including stomach, colorectal, and ovarian cancers (30Trusted Source, 31Trusted Source, 32Trusted Source, 33Trusted Source).
SUMMARY