Mustard Greens Brassica juncea

MUSTARD GREENS OVERVIEW
Mustard greens is an umbrella term for a range of Brassica species (cabbage family) that are planted mainly for their healthy leaves. They come in many varieties with their colour ranging from emerald green to deep purple. They are easy to grow and can be planted in succession for a continuous harvest.
Brassica juncea are a cultigen (only known in cultivation) from China with no wild ancestor. It is now extensively grown and has replaced Brassica nigra (Mostaza) as the main commercial mustard crop.
Grown as an annual, they can get up to 1m in height with bright yellow flowers that develop into brown, long pods. These pods contain seeds which are used for culinary purposes.
Alternatively, they can be sown indoors for use as a microgreen crop. Ready to pick only a few days after sowing, these young leaves can be snipped off and are packed with flavour ready to be eaten raw.
RELATED PLANTS
Mustard
Brassica spp.
GENUS
Japanese Mustard Spinach
Brassica rapa
Black Mustard
Brassica nigra
RELATED ARTICLES
Cabbage White Butterfly Caterpillar
COMMON PROBLEMS WITH MUSTARD GREENS
Aphids, cabbage loopers, cabbageworms, flea beetles, caterpillars, beetles, clubroot and downy mildew.
HOW TO HARVEST MUSTARD GREENS
Leaves and stalks can be harvested in 30-40 days. Young, tender leaves are the best for salads, while older ones can be cooked like spinach. You can simmer the big peppery greens or pick smaller, young leaves to eat raw in salads and sandwiches.
HOW TO PROPAGATE MUSTARD GREENS
Seed
If growing as a main mustard seed crop, direct sow in spring after the last frost. Sow seeds 12 mm deep, 2.5 cm (1") apart and in rows 60-75 cm (23 - 30") apart.
If growing for greens, sow successionally throughout the year.
Germination should take between 7-14 days.
SPECIAL FEATURES OF MUSTARD GREENS
Pot plant
Mustard Greens make great pot plants as they have shallow roots. Fill pots with loose soil and plant 2-3 seeds in each one.
Crop rotation
Mustard Greens are heavy feeders and need a lot of nutrients. Plant after Legumes, and before Potatoes.
Indoor plant
Grow in shallow containers on windowsills throughout winter for use as microgreens.
Ground cover
Brassica juncea can be grown as a cover crop and incorporated - crushed and dug back - into the soil at the point of flowering to act as a biofumigant against diseases in crops planted afterwards.
OTHER USES OF MUSTARD GREENS
Medicinal
The leaves contain vitamins, minerals, fibres, and protein. Mustard greens are considered to be high in anti-oxidants, help prevent cancer and act as an anti-inflammatory.
Edible
The leaves, the seeds, and the stem of this mustard variety are edible and can be eaten raw or cooked.