The biology of Brassica juncea (canola and mustard)

Part A - General
A1. context
In Canada, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) is responsible for regulating field trials of Plants with Novel Traits (PNTs) for use in agriculture. PNTs are defined as plant varieties or genotypes which possess traits which, on the one hand, are neither familiar nor substantially equivalent to those present in a distinct and stable population of a species grown in Canada and which, on the other hand, were intentionally selected, created or introduced into a population of this species by specific genetic modification. Familiarity means knowledge of the characteristics of a plant species and experience of its use in Canada. Essential equivalence means the equivalence of a new characteristic within a given plant species, as regards its particular use and its innocuousness for the environment and human health, compared to the characteristics of this species already used and deemed safe in Canada, this equivalence having been established by rigorous scientific reasoning.

The CNV may have been created by classical breeding or by some other means, such as a recombinant DNA technique. Regulated field trials are required if the PNT: 1) is deemed unfamiliar compared to products already in the market; 2) is not considered to be substantially equivalent to similar familiar herbs already in use and found to be safe.

Before authorizing the release of a PNT in an open environment, the risks that the PNT poses for the environment must be assessed. Directive Dir94-08, Criteria for assessing the environmental risk associated with plants with novel traits, specifies the criteria to be used and the information to be obtained to carry out this assessment, which aims to guarantee the safety of the environment in the absence of confined conditions.

A2. Scope
This document is complementary to Dir94-08. It contains basic information on the biology of Brassica juncea, its centers of origin, its relatives, the risks of genetic introgression from B. juncea into related species, and the various life forms that can interact with B. juncea.

This species-specific information will serve as a guide to certain information required in Part D of Dir94-08. In particular, it will help determine whether the new PNT gene products have the potential to significantly alter the species' interactions with other life forms and cause the PNT to become an agricultural weed, invade natural habitats or harms the environment in other ways.

In this document, conclusions drawn about the biology of Brassica juncea relate only to individuals of this species that do not exhibit novel traits.

Part B - The Biology of Brassica juncea
B1. General description, cultivation and agricultural use
Brassica juncea (L.) Czern. belongs to the Brassicaceae family (Brassicaceae), commonly called "Cruciferae", because the flowers of these plants have four petals, opposite each other in pairs so as to form a cross. In B. juncea, the foliage is pale green, the first leaves bear a few hairs, and the leaf blade ends quite high on the petiole. When mature, the plant reaches a height of one to two meters. The lower leaves are deeply lobed, while the upper ones are narrow and entire. The upper leaves are not clasping, whereas they are in B. napus and B. rapa, which are closely related to B. juncea. The inflorescence is an elongated cluster of pale yellow flowers that gradually open from the base of the cluster to its top. The pods are slightly appressed and measure 2.5 to 5 cm in length, without the beak, which is 0.5 to 1 cm in length. The seeds are spherical and can be yellow or brown.

Brassica juncea includes both varieties grown as vegetables and oilseed varieties, and these two types could have different origins (Hemingway, 1976). Both are considered natural amphidiploids (AABB genome, 2n=36) resulting from crosses between B. rapa (AA genome, 2n=20) and B. nigra (BB genome, 2n=16) . Axelsson et al. (2000) showed, by means of a molecular analysis, that B. juncea retains in its genome that of its ancestral species.

Brassica juncea can be divided into four subspecies distinguished by their morphology, their use and the characteristics that determine the quality of their products (Spect and Diederichsen, 2001):

the subspecies integrifolia, used as a leafy vegetable in Asia;
the juncea subspecies, grown mainly for its seeds and sometimes as fodder;
Ia subspecies napiformis, whose tubers are used as a root vegetable;
the taisai subspecies, whose stems and leaves are eaten as vegetables in China.
B2. Brief overview of breeding, seed and crop production practices associated with Brassica juncea mustard and canola
Brassica juncea breeders seek to improve both the agronomic performance of the plant, its resistance to disease and the characteristics determining the quality of the harvested product. The agronomic traits sought may be yield, resistance to lodging, early maturity, tolerance to herbicides, tolerance to drought, resistance to shattering and seed size. Diseases to which the plant is sought to be made resistant may include blackleg, albuginea (white rust), black spot (alternaria) and fusarium wilt. The characteristics sought in terms of the quality of the harvested product vary depending on whether you want to create a mustard or a canola variety. In the case of a canola variety, preference will be given to seeds that are high in oil, low in glucosinolates, high in protein, with a fatty acid profile consistent with canola quality, low in erucic acid and saturated fatty acids. In the case of a mustard variety, preference will be given to seeds low in oil, rich in glucosinolates, with a fatty acid profile comprising a moderate proportion of erucic acid.

Most canola and mustard varieties are pure lines, obtained by successive cycles of selfing or by a technique of dihaploidization. As with most inbred plants, the creation of a variety begins with obtaining F1 seed from the hybridization of two or more parents. The objective is then to bring together in the new variety the desirable characteristics of each of the parents. In the case of a genealogical selection program, one begins by obtaining F2 populations by self-fertilization of the F1 generation. The selection of strongly hereditary traits can start as early as the F2 generation. Selection continues over several generations, at the level of individual subjects or entire families. In the case of complex traits such as yield, selection only begins when the pedigree has reached a certain uniformity. Some programs use off-season nurseries or greenhouses to achieve genetic uniformity more quickly. In dihaploidization, immature pollen grains are collected from F1 plants and cultured using tissue culture techniques to obtain haploid plants. A mitosis inhibitor, such as colchicine, is then applied to obtain homozygous breeding lines. One or two generations of seed multiplication and selection are sufficient for dihaploid lines to be entered into yield trials. Finally, molecular markers are sometimes used to facilitate the selection of traits that are difficult to measure and the choice of parent or pollen donor subjects.

The lines retained in the nursery are enrolled in performance trials conducted in small plots in one or more localities, for one or more years. Lines selected based on the results of these trials are then entered into registration trials, which are conducted in multiple locations for at least two years. Finally, expert committees evaluate the results of these trials, based on guidelines, and then recommend to the CFIA which varieties merit registration.

Pure seed multiplication can begin even before the variety is registered. The first multiplications are often carried out under tents, in order to prevent outcrossing. Once registered, the Breeder's seed is distributed to seed growers, who multiply it and thus produce Foundation seed. Foundation seed is then used to produce Certified seed, which is used for commercial crop production. Breeder seed, Foundation seed and Certified seed must be produced in accordance with the rules of the Canadian Seed Growers' Association.

Currently, there are no commercial hybrid varieties of Brassica juncea in Canada. In the case of a hybrid variety, agricultural production requires F1 seeds obtained by crossing two pure lines, one of which is androsterile (or "male-sterile").

AMustard-type and canola-type varieties of Brassica juncea require similar cultural practices. In Canada, both types are grown mainly in the southern prairies, where one can take advantage of the better tolerance of especies to heat and drought compared to canola species B. napus. Mustard and canola are usually grown in rotation with grain or legume crops. In the southern prairies, summerfallow is frequently used to control weeds and allow the soil to accumulate moisture; the rotation cycle therefore often includes a fallow year. Mustard-type varieties as well as canola-type varieties that are intolerant of broad-spectrum herbicides are usually grown in relatively weed-free fields. Seeds of weeds such as wild mustard and cow cockle are difficult to remove from the crop, and their presence results in downgrading. Mustard and canola diseases generally do not affect cereals, and vice versa; it is therefore useful, from a phytosanitary point of view, to include both types of crops in the rotation. It is generally recommended to produce canola or mustard only one year out of three or four, in order to prevent the accumulation of diseases and weeds.

Like other small-seeded plants, mustard and canola require shallow sowing in a firm, moist seedbed for good seedling emergence. Generally, four to seven kilograms of seeds are sown per hectare. Early sowing is generally beneficial, as it takes advantage of soil moisture and avoids excessive heat during flowering. Brassica juncea seedlings tolerate frost well (Dhillon and Larsson, 1985). Seeds are usually treated against flea beetles and seedling diseases.

A limited number of herbicides are registered for the cultivation of Brassica juncea (Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, 2007). Soil-incorporated herbicides, such as trifluralin, are effective against a wide range of weeds, but require tillage that dries out the seedbed and can cause soil erosion. The only post-emergence herbicides that can be used are a few graminicides (clethodim, fenoxaprop-p-ethyl, fluazifop-p-butyl and sethoxydim) and a broadleaf weed killer (ethametsulfuron-methyl).

Mustard and canola crops of the Brassica juncea species can be harvested after swathing, but direct harvesting by combine is possible if the crop is sufficiently uniform and free of green seeds. Because B. juncea is more resistant to shattering than B. napus, it is often harvested without windrowing.

B3. Reproductive Biology of Brassica juncea
All varieties of Brassica juncea are annuals. Fertilization of ovules generally results from self-pollination, but outcrossing rates of 20-30% have been reported (Rakow and Woods, 1987). Bees are the main pollinators because the pollen is heavy and sticky and cannot be carried by the wind over great distances. Cross-pollination can also result from physical contact between the flower clusters of subjects growing in close proximity to each other.

Using a herbicide resistance marker, GhoshDastidar et al. (2000) found that outcrossing can occur up to a distance of 35 m when a plot of resistant B. juncea is surrounded by non-resistant individuals of the species. As B. juncea has a floral structure, pollen volume and outcrossing rate similar to those of B. napus, it is likely that outcrossing, as in the case of B. napus, may occasionally occur at a distance greater than 35 m (Salisbury, 2006).

Becky et al. (2003) summarized existing gene flow data on B. napus and investigated gene flow between commercial fields of cultivars with different degrees of herbicide resistance. Many parameters influence the rate of outcrossing between fields, including field size, fertility of recipient plants, environmental conditions and the presence of pollinating insects. Previous experiments had shown that the outcrossing rate decreases rapidly as the distance between fields increases, but that outcrossing remains possible at distances greater than 200 m. In their study, Beckie et al. (2003) found that the outcrossing rate was about 1.4% at the boundary between fields and was only 0.04% at a distance of 400 m. One of the years, gene flow was still detectable at 800 m, the maximum distance used for the experiment.

B4. Centers of origin of the species
The origins of Brassica juncea have not been established with certainty. We know that it is an amphidiploid whose chromosomal number is n=18. It is believed that the species arose from a natural crossbetween B. nigra (n=8) and B. rapa (n=10). B. juncea probably originated in a region where the ranges of B. nigra and B. rapa overlap, such as in the Middle East or in a neighboring region (Prakash, 1980). The foliage type (Chinese mustard) and the oilseed type (Indian mustard) may have distinct origins, as studies by Vaughan et al. (1963) on glucosinolates.

Spect and Diederichsen (2001) suggest that B. juncea probably originated somewhere between Eastern Europe and China, where the related species are sympatric. Most of the variability is found in western and central China. The species occurs as a weed in southern European Russia, the Caucasus, Central Asia and southern Siberia. It is found as an accidental or escaped plant in southern and south-eastern Asia, Africa and America.

B5. Volunteer weed from cultivated Brassica juncea
As with all field crops, Brassica juncea seeds may escape at harvest, remain in the ground until the next growing season, and then germinate before or after the crop is planted. next. Volunteer B. juncea can therefore grow and become weeds in subsequent crops. In the case of B. napus grown in Saskatchewan, these losses average about 3000 seeds per square meter (Gulden et al., 2003a). In the case of B. juncea, these losses are undoubtedly a little less, since the species is less prone to shattering, but it can be assumed that they remain significant.

Bibbey (1948) compared seed dormancy rates in various weeds, including Brassica arvensis (syn. Sinapis arvensis) and Thlaspi arvense, and in various crop species, including B. juncea. He found that the seeds of cultivated species germinate quickly, even when buried, while those of weeds remain dormant until brought to the surface. He attributed this difference to a sensitivity of weed seeds to oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations, which sensitivity would not be present in cultivated species.

Gulden et al. (2003b) observed that secondary dormancy is one of the factors favoring the persistence of spontaneous reseeding of B. napus in western Canada. These authors subsequently established that the genotype and the size of the seeds in turn influence the secondary dormancy of the seeds of this species (Gulden et al., 2004).

In Canada, Brassica juncea has been reported as an escapee from cultivation for many years (Scoggan 1957) and was first recorded in Manitoba in 1896. B. juncea is found throughout prairie and aspen -parc (Looman and Best, 1979) and is listed as a weed of Canada (Darbyshire, 2003), but has never caused significant problems and is not listed in the Seeds Order 2005 of weeds (2005). Leeson et al. (2005) compiled the various weed surveys conducted across the Prairies and found that B. juncea (Indian mustard), since 2000, has been detected in less than 0.1% of fields surveyed and ranks at 131st out of 148 species in terms of overall abundance. This situation contrasts with that of the B. napus/B. rapa (rapeseed and canola), in 14th place, and Sinapis arvensis (wild mustard) in 24th place.

Thus, despite a long history of cultivation in western Canada, B. juncea has not become a profuse weed. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that it does not possess the pest characteristics of S. arvensis and is perhaps less likely to cause problems with spontaneous resowing than B. napus or B. rapa. These cultivated species occupy different ranks as weeds partly because of the different areas allocated to their cultivation and partly because of the recent resistance of B. napus to certain herbicides. The fact remains that certain characteristics of B. juncea, such as resistance to shattering, small seed size and thinness of the seminal integument in the case of cultivars with yellow seeds, undoubtedly attenuate the harmfulness of this species compared to B. napus.

Part C - Species closely related to Brassica juncea
C1. Interspecific and intergeneric hybridization
Many interspecific and intergeneric crosses have already been made between Brassica juncea and other species of the Cruciferae family, but most have required human interventions such as ovary or egg culture, embryo recovery or fusion of protoplasts. A list of interspecific hybrids is given in Table 1.c and intergeneric species which have already been obtained by sexual crossing between B. juncea and related species. This list is mainly drawn from the extensive synthesis carried out by Warwick et al. (2000b).