First report of Amaranthus viridis resistance to herbicides

Abstracts
Due to the limited number of herbicides registered for the control of dicot weeds in cotton crops, ALS inhibitors have been used on an intensive and recurrent basis. Given that, cases of poor weed control have been described after application of these herbicides in the main cotton producing areas in Brazil, the purpose of the present work was to evaluate the occurrence of resistance to ALS herbicides in Amaranthus viridis biotypes from those areas. Dose-response curves were prepared after pre-emergence applications of trifloxysulfuron-sodium (0; 1.8; 3.7; 7.5; 15 and 30 g ha-1) and pyrithiobac-sodium (0; 35; 70; 140; 280 and 560 g ha-1), equivalent to 0, ¼, ½, 1, 2 and 4 times the recommended commercial rates. The selection of trifloxysulfuron-sodium resistant biotypes of A. viridis was confirmed in samples from Bahia (BA 7, BA 8, BA 9 and BA 11). However, no resistance to pyrithiobac-sodium was found for biotypes either from Bahia or from Mato Grosso do Sul.
trifloxysulfuron-sodium; pyrithiobac-sodium; slender amaranth; ALS-inhibiting herbicides
Devido ao limitado número de herbicidas registrados para o controle de dicotiledôneas no cultivo do algodoeiro, herbicidas inibidores da ALS tem sido utilizados de forma intensiva e recorrente. Em função de falhas de controle observadas com estes produtos nas principais áreas de produção desta cultura no Brasil, o presente trabalho teve por objetivo identificar a possível ocorrência de resistência a estes herbicidas em biótipos de Amaranthus viridis provenientes destas áreas. Foram elaboradas curvas de dose-resposta após aplicações em pré-emergência dos herbicidas trifloxysulfuron-sodium (0,0; 1,8; 3,7; 7,5; 15,0 e 30,0 g ha-1) e pyrithiobac-sodium (0,0; 35,0; 70,0; 140,0; 280,0 e 560,0 g ha-1), equivalentes a 0, ¼, ½, 1, 2 e 4 vezes a dose comercial recomendada. Foi confirmada a seleção de biótipos de A. viridis resistentes ao trifloxysulfuron-sodium provenientes de amostras coletadas no estado da Bahia (BA 7, BA 8, BA 9 e BA 11). No entanto, não foi confirmado nenhum caso de resistência ao pyrithiobac-sodium nos biótipos coletados nos estados do Mato Grosso do Sul e Bahia.
ABSTRACT
Due to the limited number of herbicides registered for the control of dicot weeds in cotton crops, ALS inhibitors have been used on an intensive and recurrent basis. Given that, cases of poor weed control have been described after application of these herbicides in the main cotton producing areas in Brazil, the purpose of the present work was to evaluate the occurrence of resistance to ALS herbicides in Amaranthus viridis biotypes from those areas. Dose-response curves were prepared after pre-emergence applications of trifloxysulfuron-sodium (0; 1.8; 3.7; 7.5; 15 and 30 g ha-1) and pyrithiobac-sodium (0; 35; 70; 140; 280 and 560 g ha-1), equivalent to 0, ¼, ½, 1, 2 and 4 times the recommended commercial rates. The selection of trifloxysulfuron-sodium resistant biotypes of A. viridis was confirmed in samples from Bahia (BA 7, BA 8, BA 9 and BA 11). However, no resistance to pyrithiobac-sodium was found for biotypes either from Bahia or from Mato Grosso do Sul.
RESUMO
Devido ao limitado número de herbicidas registrados para o controle de dicotiledôneas no cultivo do algodoeiro, herbicidas inibidores da ALS tem sido utilizados de forma intensiva e recorrente. Em função de falhas de controle observadas com estes produtos nas principais áreas de produção desta cultura no Brasil, o presente trabalho teve por objetivo identificar a possível ocorrência de resistência a estes herbicidas em biótipos de Amaranthus viridis provenientes destas áreas. Foram elaboradas curvas de dose-resposta após aplicações em pré-emergência dos herbicidas trifloxysulfuron-sodium (0,0; 1,8; 3,7; 7,5; 15,0 e 30,0 g ha-1) e pyrithiobac-sodium (0,0; 35,0; 70,0; 140,0; 280,0 e 560,0 g ha-1), equivalentes a 0, ¼, ½, 1, 2 e 4 vezes a dose comercial recomendada. Foi confirmada a seleção de biótipos de A. viridis resistentes ao trifloxysulfuron-sodium provenientes de amostras coletadas no estado da Bahia (BA 7, BA 8, BA 9 e BA 11). No entanto, não foi confirmado nenhum caso de resistência ao pyrithiobac-sodium nos biótipos coletados nos estados do Mato Grosso do Sul e Bahia.
INTRODUCTION
There are about 60 species of Amaranthus in the world, and at least 20 of them are recognized as weeds. In agricultural areas of Brazil, several species are considered to be problematic. The most widespread species are Amaranthus deflexus, Amaranthus hybridus, Amaranthus lividus, Amaranthus retroflexus, Amaranthus viridis and Amaranthus spinosus (Carvalho et al., 2006; Raimondi et al., 2010). Species within this genus are among the three most problematic weeds of North American agriculture and between the two most problematic species in cotton crops in that country (Wise et al., 2009),
Slender amaranth (Amaranthus viridis) is a species native to the Caribbean, found in tropical and subtropical regions of the world, and known to infest more than 50 crops. It is present in arable fields in over 80 countries. It stands out for its adaptability to the environment and prolific seed production.
Present in producing fields across Brazil, A.viridis is widespread in crops, occurring in all regions of the country (Maluf, 1999; Lorenzi & Matos, 2002). Together with other species of the genus Amaranthus, they are considered the most abundant weeds of Brazil's south and center-west regions. They are found in wheat, corn, flax, grass, coffee, peanuts, soybeans, cotton, beans (Viana, 1982; Lorenzi & Matos, 2002), as well as in areas of horticulture.
There are only 17 herbicides registered for the control of dicot weeds in cotton crops in Brazil. Only nine of them are registered for control of A.viridis. Many farmers have reported problems controlling A.viridis, especially in cotton, given the lack of registered herbicides, and also because it is difficult to identify this species in the field (Francischini, 2012).
Acetolactate synthase inhibiting (ALS) herbicides are often used as a result of the ease of use, broad spectrum of weed control, selectivity and optimal control they provide. In particular, trifloxysulfuron-sodium and pyrithiobac-sodium are applied sequentially in both pre and post-emergence at least two or three times during each growth cycle of cotton, because it is necessary to keep the crop free from weed throughout that period. The intensive use of these herbicides in major cotton growing areas in Brazil may have led to selection of resistant biotypes, which may be the cause of complaints of control failures recently observed in the field.
The objective of this study was to identify the presence of Amaranthus viridis biotypes that are resistant to ALS-inhibiting herbicides on cotton-producing fields in the states of Mato Grosso do Sul and Bahia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Seeds of Amaranthus viridis biotypes with suspected resistance were collected in March 2010 in cotton producing regions in Chapadão do Sul (Mato Grosso do Sul) and São Desidério (Baia) that showed control failures for several consecutive harvests. The biotype considered to be susceptible (SB) was taken from an area in the state of São Paulo where herbicide had not been applied for more than five years (
In areas where A.viridis biotypes were collected, there are records of applications of ALS-inhibiting herbicides in consecutive soybean, cotton and corn crops for more than 10 years.
At all stages, 50 seeds of each biotype were sown in pots with a capacity of 3 dm3 of soil (experimental unit), placed superficially (~ 0.5 cm), and applications of the herbicide treatments were performed shortly after weeds had been sown on moist soil using pressurized backpack sprayer with a constant pressure of 35 lb pol-2, outfitted with three XR 11002 tips, spaced 0.5 m apart and placed at 0.5 m from the surface of the targets, providing a rate of 200 L ha-1.
The soil samples used had a sandy loam texture, and were underwent analysis to determine chemical properties and grain size. The soil used in the experimental units had pH(H2O) 5.50; 4.13 g dm-3 of C; 14% coarse sand; 38% fine sand; 6% silt and 42% clay.
Herbicides used for identification of suspected resistance were trifloxysulfuron-sodium and pyrithiobac-sodium, applied in pre-emergence of Amaranthus viridis biotypes. These herbicides were chosen because of their recurrent use in cotton fields and because of their potential to control species of the genus Amaranthus (Sibony et al., 2001; Francischini, 2012).
Doses of trifloxysulfuron-sodium and pyrithiobac-sodium used to obtain a dose response curve, relate to 0, ¼, ½, 1, 2 and 4 times the recommended dose. Thus, dose 1 (recommended) was set according to work done by Carvalho et al. (2006) and Francischini (2012) for application in pre-emergence in cotton crops.
Although pyrithiobac-sodium was registered for control of A.viridis at a dose of 98 g ha 1, the dose equivalent to 140 g ha-1, was chosen according to work done by Carvalho et al. (2006) and Francischini (2012), to ensure safety margin for making decisions about the resistance of biotypes.
Table 2 shows the doses and herbicides used.
The application was done soon after sowing. At the time of application, the sky was partly cloudy, with a temperature of 26 °C, RH 68%, and wind speed of 1.9 km h-1. Immediately after the treatments, the experimental units were irrigated with water depth of 5 mm, and daily irrigation was kept constant until the end of the experiment.
The experimental design was randomized blocks, and each herbicide was considered as a separate experiment. Both experiments were conducted in a factorial 7 x 6 scheme, 7 biotypes and 6 doses of each herbicide.
In all experiments, control evaluations were made (visual analogue scale 0-100%, where 0% means no symptoms and 100% total death of weeds) at 28 days after application (DAA), and control values greater than or equal to 80% were considered to be satisfactory. At 28 DAA, the shoots of the remaining Amaranthus viridis plants were harvested by cutting close to the ground and then placed in paper bags, and placed in an forced air circulation oven at 65 °C to constant weight. The samples were subsequently weighed for accumulation of dry matter from the experimental units (g per plant). Dry matter was adjusted for percentage values by comparing the weight obtained in the herbicide treatments with the weight of the herbicide-free control, considered as 100%.
The data underwent the application of the F-test in analysis of variance, and they were fitted to the log-logistic, nonlinear regression model for dose-response curves. The control variable was fitted to the model proposed by Streibig et al. (1988):