Amaranthus viridis (slender amaranth)

Description
A. viridis is similar to other species of Amaranthus, having distinct leaf venation and long petioles.Description (After Townsend, 1985)An annual herbaceous plant. Stem erect or usually ascending, 6-80 (sometimes up to 100) cm tall, glabrous to pubescent, pubescent especially upwards. Leaves glabrous or pubescent on the veins of the lower surface; petioles long (up to 10 cm), occasionally longer than the blade; blade ovate to rhombic-oblong, 2-7 x 1.5-5.5 cm, base tapered to blunt, tip rounded, minutely mucronate, barely to clearly emarginate. Flowers green, unisexual, male and female intermixed, in slender axillary to terminal paniculate spikes 2-12 cm long and 2-5 mm wide, or in dense axillary clusters in the lower part of the stem. Bracts deltoid- to lanceolate-ovate, membraneous with a short awn from the green midrib. Perianth-segments 3, about 1.5 mm long. Stigmas 2-3. Capsule nearly globose 1.25-1.75 mm long, not rupturing or rupturing irregularly, surface rough. Seed 1-1.25 mm, round, slightly compressed, dark brown to black with a paler thick border.
Distribution
A. viridis is cosmopolitan in all warm regions of the world. It is one of the most common weeds in the tropics, subtropics and warm temperate regions. It is listed in virtually all of the warm temperate and tropical floras of the world.A. viridis has also been recorded from the former USSR (Vasil'chenko, 1936).
Biology and Ecology
A. viridis is an annual herb which grows from 6 to 100 cm high. It propagates by seed and flowers all year in subtropical and tropical climates. The seeds lose viability over time and this loss in viability is faster at higher temperatures (Purwanto and Poerba, 1990). However, treatment of seeds with concentrated sulphuric acid increased germination by three times, and 100% germination was obtained at 35°C (Ikenaga et al., 1975a). The time when seeds are sown affects germination; germination percentage increases and emergence time decreases with later sowing dates. Plants flowered with sowing in any month (Ikenaga et al., 1976a, b). High soil moisture (85%) delays seed germination. Flooding during the period between October and April kills the seeds (Yamamoto and Ohba, 1977). There was no change in the germination of seeds which were buried 2.5 cm below the surface and deeper for up to a year, indicating a survival technique used by this species (Horng and Leu, 1978).A. viridis has C4 photosynthesis (Rajagopalan et al., 1993) and has been found to grow best in intermediate light intensities (Simbolon and Sutamo, 1986). It can co-exist with the equally common Amaranthus spinosus because the two species have different nutritional requirements (Ramakrishnan, 1976).The basic chromosome number is 10 (Sammour et al., 1993). A. viridis hybridizes with A. blitum (Coons, 1981). Separate from hybridization, distinct forms of A. viridis have been discussed (Narwal, 1972), but not formalized due to the gradual progression of characteristics among the forms.A. viridis is grown and utilized in many areas of the world as both a wild and cultivated pot herb (Uphof, 1968). The plant is rich in calcium and iron and is a good source of vitamins B and C (Morton, 1981). Due to its small seed size and use as a pot herb, A. viridis is moved, both on purpose and unwittingly, throughout the world. The seeds can survive in the digestive tract of chickens (Rodriguez et al., 1983). It is good cattle fodder, and is used medicinally and for making soap (Dalziel, 1937), but is poisonous to pigs (Salles et al., 1991).
Notes on Natural Enemies
A. spinosus is attacked by a number of natural enemies. Most of the reports come from outside its range and are of non-specific organisms; some, however, may be sufficiently specific for potential biological control (Waterhouse, 1994; El-Aydam and Burki, 1997). A. spinosus is a host plant for tobacco mosaic virus, groundnut rosette virus, cucumber mosaic virus and root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.), which attack some commercial crops. Natural insect enemies includes the pyralid Herpetogramma bipunctalis and the curculionid Conotrachelus seniculus. In India, the bud weevil Ceutorhynchus asperulus, a pest of pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan), has been found feeding on A. spinosus (Lemmens and Bunyapraphatsara, 1999).
Detection and Inspection
It is difficult to separate A. viridis from several other species of Amaranthus. It is characterized by its few, small perianth segments and broad, rough-textured capsule. Townsend (1985) has an especially useful set of drawings comparing the perianth and capsules of most of the important weedy species.
Prevention and Control
Due to the variable regulations around (de)registration of pesticides, your national list of registered pesticides or relevant authority should be consulted to determine which products are legally allowed for use in your country when considering chemical control. Pesticides should always be used in a lawful manner, consistent with the product's label.
