The health benefits of Amaranthus hybridus and Amaranthus viridis

Amaranthus viridis (Tete abalaye in Yoruba) is an annual, erect plant which can reach a height of 20–90 cm, branching weakly especially in the upper half.  The leaves have entire margins and they are ovate to trapezoid in shape. The inflorescences are terminal and axillary spikes; there are also bunches of flowers at the axils. Amaranthus hybridus is the commercial amaranth widely cultivated all over Nigeria. It is a robust, heavy-branching plant that can reach a height of one metre or more in permissive environments. The leaves are broad, ovate and closely-packed on the main stem and branches making it a typical leafy vegetable.  The inflorescences are terminal and axillary as in A. viridis.
The story of the amaranths of our land is not complete without the mention of Amaranthus spinosus (dagunro, in Yoruba). This species is a relative of A. viridis and studies have shown that they interbreed and have indeed produced hybrids one of which is known as Amaranthus lividus and a host of other intermediate plants that combine the characters of A viridis, A. spinosus and, in waste places close to eateries, A. hybridus. The tell-tale character for a plant carrying the genes of A. spinosus is the spine in the centre of the axillary cluster. People who pick A. viridis should watch for spines, even if weak, as a marker to avoid picking plants that have the genetic content of A. spinosus.  A spinosus is however a medicinal plant in its own right.
Let us look at some health benefits of eating Amaranth leaves.
Amaranth leaves are a storehouse of essential phytonutrients and antioxidants which help to reduce inflammation in the body and provide an extra boost of nutrition to one’s health
They are rich in soluble and insoluble fiber. Eating fiber helps us to reduce weight and ward off heart disease as it lowers the cholesterol in the blood. Amaranths are high in protein and fiber, both of which may help reduce appetite and increase weight loss.
Iron is needed for producing red blood cells and cellular metabolism. Reap maximum benefits of this powerful punch of iron that amaranth leaves provide by adding some source of vitamin C as it facilitates maximum absorption of iron in the blood. So, you could add a dash of lemon or have the amaranth leaves dish with a glass of fresh orange juice.
Rich in Vitamin A
Amaranth leaves are rich in vitamin A. They are also full of flavonoid polyphenolic antioxidants like beta-carotene, zeaxanthin and lutein which provide a protective layer against oxidative stress caused by free radicals. Vitamin A is also needed for healthy skin and proper vision.
Rich in Vitamin K
This vitamin is needed for good bone health and also plays an important role in blood clotting. It promotes osteoblastic activity and strengthens bone mass. Also, it is beneficial for those who suffer from Alzheimer’s disease as it controls the neural damage done in the brain.
Rich in B Vitamins
Amaranth leaves are replete with vitamins of the B group: folate, riboflavin, niacin, thiamin, vitamin B6 and others are all found in this leafy green. They help prevent birth defects in new-born babies and are needed for optimal mental and physical health.
Rich in potassium
The leaves of this wonder plant are full of potassium. The element is needed for good cardiac health. It also controls heart rate in the human body.
Amaranth is gluten-free
The seeds of amaranth plant are used as a grain and can be ground to be made into flour. This is protein-rich flour entirely gluten-free, so it is incredibly beneficial for those who have gluten intolerance.
Amaranth leaves and grain are rich in protein, leaving behind even oats as a protein-rich grain. Receiving protein from a plant source is considered much healthier than obtaining it from an animal source as the former has no or much less fat and cholesterol. Having a protein-rich diet leads to suppression of hunger as they reduce insulin levels in the blood and keeps one feeling satiated.
Amaranth leaves have lysine
Amaranth leaves have lysine, an essential amino acid needed for energy production and absorption of calcium. It also promotes hair growth and good skin. Those who suffer from hair loss or greying will benefit significantly from eating amaranth leaves.
Reduces bad cholesterol
Amaranth leaves are known to lower the bad cholesterol responsible for many cardiac problems.
Rich in calcium
They are rich in calcium and thus beneficial for those suffering from osteoporosis and other bone health problems related to deficiency of calcium.
Easy to digest
Amaranth leaves are offered to those convalescing after an illness or those fasting as they are easy on the digestive system. They are helpful in treating diarrhoea and haemorrhages. Regular consumption has been known to benefit digestion.
Fights cancer
This is because they contain flavonoids that have anti-cancer properties. A study shows that flavonoids can prevent the occurrence of cancer cell division thus showing promise of reducing cancer risk by about 34 per cent.
Amaranthus viridis however has higher medicinal values, a decoction of the entire plant is used to stop dysentery and inflammation. The plant is an emollient and vermifuge. The root juice is used to treat inflammation during urination. It is also taken to treat constipation.
Yellow and green dyes can be obtained from the whole plant.  The leaves are diuretic and purgative and used as poultices (fresh or as dried powder) to treat inflammations, boils and abscesses, gonorrhoea, orchitis and haemorrhoids.
Amaranthus viridis is used as traditional medicine in the treatment of fever, pain, asthma, diabetes, dysentery, urinary disorders, liver disorders, eye disorders and venereal diseases. The plant also possesses anti-microbial properties.
You Might Also Like
In Nigeria, an infusion of the whole plant is used to purify the blood and the pounded root is applied against dysentery. In Côte d’Ivoire, the sap is used as an eye wash to treat eye infections and for treating convulsions and epilepsy in children. In DR Congo, the sap is said to act as a vermifuge, being effective against filaria, as an emmenagogue and to relieve heart troubles. The leaves are believed to have febrifugal properties. Ash of Amaranthus viridis plant is rich in soda and occasionally used to make soap.
Amaranthus viridis has been used in Indian and Nepalese traditional system to reduce labour pain and act as an antipyretic (Kirtikar and Basu, 1987). The Negritos of the Philippines apply the bruised leaves directly to eczema, psoriasis and rashes etc. (Quisumbing, 1951).
Other traditional uses range from an anti-inflammatory agent of the urinary tract, venereal diseases, vermifuge, diuretic, anti-rheumatic, antiulcer, analgesic, antiemetic, laxative, improvement of appetite, antileprotic, treatment of respiratory and eye problems, treatment of asthma (Anonymous, 1988; Arshad and Khan, 2000).
Furthermore, the plant possesses antiproliferative and antifungal properties as well as production of ribosome inactivating protein, β-carotene (Kaur et al, 2006; Sena et al, 1998) and antiviral activities (Obi et al, 2006).
Due to the fact that Amaranthus viridis (Tete abalaye) has a higher medicinal value, I will go for it anytime any day.