Exploring Polyphenol Based Bioactive Antioxidants of Underutilized Herb Amaranthus Spinosus L. for Medicinal Purposes

ORIGINAL ARTICLEOPEN ACCESS
Exploring Polyphenol Based Bioactive Antioxidants of Underutilized Herb Amaranthus Spinosus L. for Medicinal Purposes
Agnideepa Kar and Soumen Bhattacharjee* 
 Author information
Journal of Exploratory Research in Pharmacology 2022;7(3):150 162doi: 10.14218/JERP.2022.00012
Abstract
Background and objectives
Though Amaranthus spinosus L. or ‘spiny amaranth’ belonging to the family Amaranthaceae is widely used in folklore and for ethnomedicinal purposes, little is known about the ecotype based bioavailability of bioactive polyphenolic compounds that could cause health benefits. Hence, this was the objective of the present study.
Methods
Reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography coupled with a photodiode assay was used to investigate pharmacologically significant bioactive flavonoids and phenolic acids from hydroethanolic leaf extract of two different ecotypes (the Rarh region and coastal plain of West Bengal, India) of Amaranthus spinosus L. Furthermore, the antioxidant capacity of the leaf tissue extract of both the ecotypes of this promising crop was evaluated in terms of the metal chelating property, total antioxidant capacity (2,2 diphenyl 1 picryl hydrazyl hydrate assay), anti lipid peroxidation property, and the total pool of flavonoids and phenolics for validating their health promoting anti degenerative chemical properties.
Results
The results exhibited a rich source of pharmacologically important bioactive flavonoids and phenolic acids derived from the chalcone synthase and cinnamate derived pathways for both the ecotypes, but when comparing the ecotype of the Rarh region, it proved to be superior to the ecotype of the coastal region.
Conclusions
Overall, the study suggests a region specific ecotype effect on the accumulation of dietary flavonoids, phenolic acids, and antioxidant traits of Amaranthus spinosus L., thus substantiating their utility in the prevention of degenerative diseases. The study also highlighted the significance of plant environment interaction in a secondary metabolic pathway, which may be explored in the future for improving the medicinal and functional food properties of underutilized crops for the prevention of degenerative diseases.
Keywords
Amaranthus spinosus, Bioactive polyphenols, Ecotypes, Antioxidant property, Phytonutrients
Introduction
In recent times, research on the effects of dietary polyphenols derived from plants on human health has developed considerably.1–3 Polyphenols generally exert protective action against degenerative diseases, particularly cancers, as well as neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases.4–6 Current studies have also exposed that several of these diseases are associated to oxidative stress triggered by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species.7,8 However, plant secondary metabolites, especially polyphenols, have been found to be one of the most potent classes of compounds responsible for conferring antioxidant properties in plants. Additionally, polyphenols significantly reduce oxidative stress by hindering the formation of or neutralizing the reactive oxygen species and precursors of oxyfree radicals. In several cases, they have acted as direct radical scavengers of the intermediates of the chain reaction of lipid peroxidation, thereby acting as chain breakers.8–10 In fact, chain breakers donate an electron to the oxyfree radicals, deactivating the radicals, and themselves becoming stable (less reactive) radicals, thus stopping the chain reactions of lipid peroxidation.7,8 Furthermore, apart from the direct scavenging of reactive oxygen species (ROS), polyphenols act as transition metal chelators necessary for the Fenton reaction. Chelation of transition metals, such as Fe2+ can directly reduce the rate of the Fenton reaction, thus preventing the formation of highly reactive hydroxyl radicals.11,12 Moreover, several previous studies indicated the pharmacological role of flavonoids as anti inflammatory, gastro and hepato protective, antimicrobial, antifungal, antiviral, antimalarial, antineoplastic, and antidiabetic agents, while corroborating their strong antioxidant functions.13–15 Recently, serious focus has been paid in discovering the dietary sources of natural antioxidants of plants to prevent such degenerative diseases in the backdrop of significant negative effects of synthetic antioxidants.
Amaranthus spinosus L. or ‘spiny amaranth’, commonly consumed as a leafy vegetable, is cultivated widely in tropical countries and warm temperate regions of Asia, including India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka. This underutilized medicinal herb, belonging to the family Amaranthaceae, has frequently been used in traditional systems of medicine.16 In addition, the plant has been explored for diverse purposes as a diuretic, laxative, antipyretic, and febrifuge, as revealed from the Ayurveda and other Indian traditional systems of medicine. There are also records of utilization of this medicinal herb to treat diverse medical conditions like blood diseases, bronchitis, leprosy, piles, leucorrhea, anorexia, flatulence, nausea, etc.17–21 Previous works based on phytochemical investigations revealed that spiny amaranth is a good reservoir of various medicinally important secondary metabolites like glycosides, phenolic compounds, steroids, terpenoids, betalain, stigmasterol, saponin, linoleic acid, carotenoids, tannins, etc. that strongly assure their medicinal properties as well as antioxidant potential.22–25
Most of the bioactive substances or secondary metabolites of plant origin are produced as a result of plant environment interaction during their evolutionary history. The genesis of these compounds associated with the phytonutrient promise was therefore found to have a significant correlation with the plant environmental interaction.26,27 For example, the contents of phenolic compounds in crops were found to be affected by different agro climatic environments, consequently causing an alteration of their phytonutrient properties.27,28 Till now, several studies have considered Amaranthus spinosus L. for its ethnomedicinal uses and nutritional attributes, but there is a dearth of literature which considers the ecotype effect on the bioaccumulation of polyphenol based antioxidants with phytonutrient promise. Therefore, identification of the right ecotype of medicinal plants like Amaranthus spinosus deserves special attention in view of realizing their phytonutrient promise. Moreover, the role of the phenotypic plasticity and genotypic diversity necessary for adaptation in diverse ecological conditions, while regulating the secondary metabolic pathway for improving the medicinal and functional food properties has been seldom studied; hence, this is the primary objective of the present study. In the current study, an effort was made to compare the ecotype specific variation of the accumulation of bioactive polyphenolic compounds (derived from the phenylpropanoid pathway) and associated antioxidant properties necessary for characterizing a low cost supplement of natural antioxidants for the mitigation of degenerative diseases.
Materials and methods
Amaranthus spinosus L. plant was collected from the local harvest of two different phytogeographical regions of West Bengal, India [the Rarh region (comprising of the phytogeographical region of three districts: Burdwan, Bankura, Birbhum, with alluvial soil and average rainfall of 135 cm) and the coastal plain (the phytogeographical region of Diamond Harbor with clay loamy soil and average rainfall of 200 cm)]. Then, the plant materials were identified from the Central National Herbarium, Botanical Survey of India, Howrah, West Bengal, India [Voucher Specimen no. CNH/Tech./II/2020/5b, reference no. BU/SB/AK 004 (Rarh region) and BU/SB/AK 006 (Diamond Harbor)]. The leaves were separately harvested and dried at 45°C for 48 h in a hot air oven. Then, the samples were ground to a fine powder and were kept in an opaque bottle for further experimental work.
Sample preparation for the HPLC study
In the Soxhlet apparatus, 15 g of oven dried and powdered leaves from each experimental sample were extracted with 150 ml 95% of ethanol for three to four cycles. The extract was taken and filtered. The filtrate was concentrated and dried in a rotary vacuum evaporator (Eyela) at 50 ± 2°C and subsequently filtered using membrane filter paper (Millipore) before being subjected to high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
RP HPLC study for the estimation of the phenolic acids and flavonoids
Reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP HPLC) analyses were conducted by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system using a diode array detector (DAD) with a 5 cm flow cell with a Chromeleon system manager as the data processor. A reversed phase Acclaim C18 column (5 µ particle size; 250 × 4.6 mm) was used to separate the phenolic compounds. 20 µl of the sample was loaded into the HPLC column. The mobile phase was made up of solvent A (methanol) and solvent B (0.05% of aq. acetic acid) and the column was thermostatically regulated at 25°C. In the mobile phase (methanol and acetic acid), the dried crude extract was dissolved. Subsequently, a gradient elution was done by varying the amount of the solvent A to solvent B. Per sample, the total analysis time was 105 m. We observed the HPLC chromatograms at three different wavelengths (272, 280, and 310 nm, respectively) using a photodiode array UV detector. We identified each phenolic compound by its RT value and by enriching it with the known standards used in this experiment under the same conditions. The quantitative estimation of the 21 experimental polyphenolic compounds (gallic acid, protocatechuic acid, ferulic acid, caffeic acid, sinapic acid, p hydroxyl benzoic acid, chlorogenic acid, ellagic acid, syringic acid, p coumaric acid, salicylic acid, gentisic acid, vanillic acid, naringin, apigenin, catechin, myricetin, quercetin, naringenin, kaempferol, and rutin) presented in the methanolic leaf extract was conducted by measuring the integrated peak area against the peak areas of the corresponding standard samples. For the preparation of the standard solutions of the 21 polyphenolic compounds (Sigma Chemicals), a stock solution of each in methanol (HPLC grade) with a concentration of 10 µg/ml was prepared. The HPLC grade membrane filters (0.45 mm; Millipore) were used to filter all the standard solutions.29
Sample preparation and extraction for the quantification of the pool of polyphenolic compounds
50 ml of 95% of methanol was added to 5 g of each powder plant material for extraction for 48 h. In order to analyse the phytochemical content, we centrifuged the extracts at 10,000 rpm for 15 m at room temperature, and then stored the supernatants in the refrigerator.
Total phenolic content
The total phenol content in the extracts was determined using the spectrophotometric Folin Ciocalteu method of Djeridane et al.30 02 ml of the Folin Ciocatleu reagent and 2 ml of saturated NaHCO3 were added to the extract solutions. After incubating the reaction mixture at 45°C at room temperature, the absorbance was read at 765 nm. Based on a standard curve of gallic acid, the amount of the total phenolics in the leaf samples of the two ecotypes was calculated as gallic acid equivalents per gram of dry weight.
Total flavonoid content
For the quantification of the flavonoids present in the leaf extracts, the process of Chang et al. was used.31 An aliquot of 0.1 ml of methanolic leaf extract solution was mixed with 0.1 ml of AlCl3 solution and 0.1 ml of CH3COOK solution with a volume made up to 3 ml with distilled water. The absorbance was performed at 415 nm, and the concentration was calculated using the standard curve for the quercetin equivalents per gram of dry mass.
DPPH radical scavenging assay
For the determination of the total antioxidant capacity of the leaf extracts, a 2,2 diphenyl 1 picryl hydrazyl hydrate (DPPH) assay was conducted according to the process of Shyu and Hwang.32 In the DPPH radical scavenging assay, the dark violet colored stable DPPH radical was made to react with the plant extract, where depending on the reducing capacity of the experimental plant extracted the dark violet color to become pale yellow or colorless. To determine the scavenging activity, 1 ml of plant extract was mixed with 3 ml of the DPPH solution. Then, the solution was incubated for 30 m at 35°C and the absorbance was measured. The absorbance of the DPPH without the plant sample (control) was also measured. Radical scavenging by DPPH was calculated by using the formula:
% of inhibition
where Ac was the absorbance of the control, and As was the absorbance with the plant extract.
Finally, the IC50 of the antioxidant capacity of each plant extract was determined, as the inhibitor concentration (estimated on the basis of the dried leaf extract) required inhibiting 50% of the radical scavenging activity in terms of the DPPH assay.
Metal chelating property
Based on the process described by Lin et al., the metal chelating property of the experimental plant sample was estimated.33 Briefly, 1 ml of the plant extract was added with 0.02 ml of ferrous chloride (20 mM) and 0.04 ml of ferrozine (5 mM). At 562 nm, the absorbance was measured after shaking the mixture for 10 m at room temperature. The metal chelating ability was calculated by:
Activity (%)
where Ac was the absorbance of the control, and As was the absorbance with the plant extract.
Anti lipid peroxidation assay
The inhibition of the lipid peroxidation of the experimental foliar sample was evaluated according to the process of Amabye by measuring the oxidation of the linoleic acid.34 The plant extracts were added to 0.13 ml of linoleic acid solution, 10 ml of 99.8% ethanol, 10 ml of 0.2 M sodium phosphate buffer, and the volume was made up to 25 ml with distilled water. Briefly, 0.2 ml of ammonium thiocyanate solution (30%), 10 ml of ethanol, and 0.2 ml of ferrous chloride solution (20 mM in 3.5% HCl) were added to the mixture and after 3 m of stirring, the absorption was measured at 500 nm. The negative control contained all the reagents except the plant extracts. The maximum peroxidation was observed at 360 h (15 days). Oxidation was evaluated by the following equation:
change in absorbance of treated sample
change in absorbance of the control sample
×
100.
Statistical analysis
For the statistical analysis, the leaf samples of the two experimental ecotypes were collected thrice independently, and each experiment was conducted twice at different times. Furthermore, for the assessment of the test for significance, a paired two sample t test was performed with the help of Microsoft Excel 2010.
Results
In the present investigation, we targeted 21 polyphenolic compounds of the phenylpropanoid pathway with the established antioxidant promise for the comparative RP HPLC analysis of the hydro ethanolic leaf extracts of two experimental ecotypes. This was because the complete qualitative and quantitative profiling of the entire individual polyphenolic compounds was not possible because of their huge structural and functional diversity. For this, we explored pharmaceutically important phenolic acids and flavonoids, which were derived from the phenylpropanoid pathway involving chalcone and cinnamic acid (salicylic acid, chlorogenic acid, protocatechuic acid, p hydroxyl benzoic acid, gentisic acid, p coumaric acid, syringic acid, caffeic acid, sinapic acid, ellagic acid, ferulic acid, vanillic acid, and gallic acid, apigenin, rutin, naringin, naringenin, myricetin, catechin, quercetin, and kaempferol) and correlated their bioavailability with important biomarkers of the antioxidant properties. The leaf extract of the Rarh region exhibited greater abundance of some phenolic acids like gallic acid, chlorogenic acid, p hydroxyl benzoic acid, p coumaric acid, caffeic acid, salicylic acid, and syringic acid (Fig. 1). On the contrary, the leaf extract of the coastal plain revealed greater abundance of ellagic acid, protocatechuic acid, ferulic acid, and syringic acid (Fig. 2). When we compared the bioavailability of eight bioactive flavonoids derived from the chalcone synthase dependent phenylpropanoid pathway, we found the maximum bioavailability of naringin, rutin, quercetin, apigenin, and catechin in the leaf tissue extract of the Rarh region, whereas the leaf extract of the coastal plain exhibited greater abundance of myricetin and naringenin (Table 1). Overall, the leaf extract of the Rarh region exhibited a presence of 20 polyphenolic compounds tested as compared to 19 compounds from the leaf tissue extract of the coastal plain, thus making the ecotype of the Rarh region to be superior based on the diversity of the phenylpropanoid pathway dependent polyphenolic compound available.
RP HPLC derived chromatogram of pharmacologically important phenolic acids and flavonoids of the leaf tissue of <italic>Amaranthus spin</italic>o<italic>sus</italic> L. collected from the Rarh region (Burdwan) of West Bengal.
Fig. 1  RP HPLC derived chromatogram of pharmacologically important phenolic acids and flavonoids of the leaf tissue of Amaranthus spinosus L. collected from the Rarh region (Burdwan) of West Bengal.
RP HPLC derived chromatogram of the pharmacologically important phenolic acids and flavonoids of the leaf tissue of <italic>Amaranthus spin</italic>o<italic>sus</italic> L. collected from the coastal region (Diamond Harbor) of West Bengal.
Fig. 2  RP HPLC derived chromatogram of the pharmacologically important phenolic acids and flavonoids of the leaf tissue of Amaranthus spinosus L. collected from the coastal region (Diamond Harbor) of West Bengal.
Table 1
Comparative account of the availability of pharmacologically important bioactive polyphenolic compounds and their pharmacological activities of the two different ecotypes of Amaranthus spinosus L
Name of the polyphenolic compound	Structure	Pharmacological activities	Amount (µg 100gdm) in Amaranthus spinosus ecotypes
Ecotype of Rarh region (Burdwan)	Ecotype of the coastal plain (Diamond Harbor)
Gallic acid		Antioxidant, Anti inflammatory, Antineoplastic, Anticancer	602.92	232.75
P hydroxyl benzoic acid		Antimutagenic, Antiestrogenic, Anti inflammatory	60.44	20.5
Protocatechuic acid		Antioxidant, Anticancer, Antiulcer, Antidiabetic, Antiaging, Anti inflammatory, Antiartherosclerotic, Hepatoprotective, Cardioprotective	35.8	113
Chlorogenic acid		Antioxidant, Anti inflammatory, Hepatoprotective, Cardioprotective, Neuroprotective	98	36.73
Gentisic acid		Antioxidant, Hepatoprotective, Anti inflammatory, Neuroprotective	–	–
Vanillic acid		Anti inflammatory, Neuroprotective	29.4	–
Ellagic acid		Anticancer, Anti atherogenic, Neuroprotective, Anti inflammatory	160.76	169.55
Ferulic acid		Anticancer, Antioxidant, Cardioprotective, Neuroprotective, Anti inflammatory, Antidiabetic	100.9	119.75
Caffeic acid		Anticarcinogenic, Antioxidant, Anti inflammatory	194.8	99.47
Sinapic acid		Antioxidant, Anti inflammatory, Neuroprotective, Antimutagenic, Anticancer	2.1	14.45
Syringic acid		Cardioprotective, Anticancer, Hepatoprotective, Neuroprotective, Antioxidant, Anti inflammatory	117.42	66.92
P coumaric acid		Anti inflammatory, Antioxidant, Antineoplastic	168.4	87.6
Salicylic acid		Anti inflammatory	161.6	23.95
Naringin		Anticancer, Anti inflammatory, Hepatoprotective, Antiapoptotic, Antimutagenic	106.54	79.6
Rutin		Anti inflammatory, Antidiabetic, Cytoprotective, Vasoprotective, Anticarcinogenic, Neuroprotective, Cardioprotective, Antiarthritic, Antiulcer, Neuroprotective	20.68	20.25
Myricetin		Anti inflammatory, Antidiabetic, Anticancer	28.7	123.95
Quercetin		Anti inflammatory, Anticancer, Antitumor	326.6	186.97
Naringenin		Antidiabetic, Antiatherogenic, Antitumor, Antiinflammatory	8.94	24.57
Kaempferol		Anticancer, Antiapoptotic, Anti inflammatory, Antidiabetic, Cardioprotective	13.38	2.32
Apigenin		Anti inflammatory, antitoxicant, anticancer	5.7	.327
Catechin		Anticancer, Cardioprotective, Protect against Neodegenerative disease, Anti inflammatory, Antiallergic	141.32	124.5
The estimation of the total pool of foliar flavonoids and phenols of the two different experimental ecotypes substantiated the data of the abundance of polyphenolic compounds tested through RP HPLC (Figs. 3a, b). For the comparative estimation of the antioxidant properties and associated phytonutrient attributes, we standardized the sensitive biomarkers of the antioxidant potential like the total antioxidant capacity (radical scavenging property), metal chelating property, and anti inflammatory property (anti lipid peroxidation ability). The leaf extract of the Rarh region showed a significantly better metal chelating property compared to the leaf extract of the coastal region (Fig. 4a). The maximum DPPH radical scavenging ability was observed in the leaf extract of the Rarh region followed by the coastal plain (Fig. 4b). The inhibition of the oxidation of linoleic acid, explored as the basis of the anti lipid peroxidation assay, showed the same result with the foliar extract of the Rarh region exhibiting a significantly higher inhibition of peroxidation of the lipid followed by the leaf extract of the coastal region (Fig. 4c). The comparative estimation of the total pool of the flavonoids and phenolic acids from the methanolic foliar extracts of the experimental ecotypes strongly substantiated the data of all the important parameters or biomarkers of the antioxidant potential investigated (Figs. 3a, b).