Brassica juncea (PROTA)

Uses
Brassica juncea has many uses. It has various uses as a vegetable, its seeds provide oil, and after grinding are used to make mustard. It is also used as fodder and for medicinal purposes.
In Africa and many parts of Asia the leaves are eaten as a vegetable; they are chopped, boiled and served as an accompaniment to the staple food. Old or drought wilted leaves are very bitter; to eat them, they must be cooked in two waters. The tender young leaves (“mustard greens” in English) are used in salads, mixed with other varieties of salad. In Asia, brown mustard greens are used in pickles, or offered as a canned or frozen vegetable. The sprouted seeds are used as a garnish in salads, or to give them a spicy taste. In East Asia, various varieties of vegetables have been selected from Brassica juncea, comparable to those provided by Brassica oleracea L. “Tai tau choï” or “tuberous mustard” has a swollen root and is prepared and eaten like turnips, while the “cha tsoï” or “tsatsaï” has a curious swollen stem, covered with protrusions, which is preserved in brine and compressed until most of the water is eliminated .
In Asia, Europe and America, Brassica juncea is cultivated mainly for its seeds used in the manufacture of brown mustard and for the extraction of a vegetable oil. It has been introduced locally for this purpose in Africa, e.g. in the Mascarene Islands. In much of Europe Brassica juncea has replaced Brassica nigra as the main source of commercial mustard seed. It gives a spicier mustard than the yellow mustard made from Brassica nigra. Mustard oil is one of the main edible oils in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, where its special flavor and pungent taste are appreciated. In neighboring regions of the former USSR, it is used as a substitute for olive oil. In Western countries, its use as an edible oil is restricted due to its high erucic acid content. Mustard oil is also used as a hair oil and as a lubricant. The oil of cultivars selected for their high erucic acid content has industrial uses. A particular use of mustard oil is to retard the fermentation process in cider making. The seeds are also used in bird seed mixes. Mustard seed meal is high in protein, but its high glucosinolate content makes it unsuitable for consumption by humans and monogastric animals.
Brown mustard is known to have analgesic, laxative, diuretic, emetic and rubefacient properties. It is a traditional remedy for arthritis, sore feet, lumbago and rheumatism. In China the seeds are used as a medicine against tumours. Ingesting them can impart a body odor that repels mosquitoes. The leaves applied to the forehead are said to relieve headaches. The leaves are ingested in the form of soup to treat inflammation or haemorrhage of the bladder. In Korea, mustard seeds are used to treat abscesses, colds, lumbago, rheumatism and stomach disorders. Brown mustard oil is used against rashes and ulcers. In Tanzania, dairy cows are fed mustard roots to stimulate milk secretion.
Production and international trade
Statistics on the production and trade of oil and mustard from Brassica juncea are difficult to find, because they are often cumulated or confused with those of rapeseed (Brassica napus L.) and rape (Brassica rapa L. .). Brassica oils are the third most important vegetable oil, after soy and palm. Brown mustard, as a vegetable, is traded only locally, even in parts of Asia where it is an important vegetable. In Africa, it occurs mainly in southern Africa, and is rare elsewhere. In Zambia and Zimbabwe, where it is called colza (“rape”), it is very popular, but there are no reliable statistics on cultivate area, production and marketing.
Properties
Brown mustard leaves contain, per 100 g of edible part: water 90.8 g, energy 109 kJ (26 kcal), protein 2.7 g, fat 0.2 g, carbohydrate 4.9 g, dietary fiber 3 .3 g, Ca 103 mg, Mg 32 mg, P 43 mg, Fe 1.46 mg, Zn 0.2 mg, vitamin A 10,500 IU, thiamine 0.08 mg, riboflavin 0.11 mg, niacin 0.80 mg, folate 187  g, ascorbic acid 70 mg. Dry mustard seeds contain per 100 g of edible part:water 6.9 g, energy 1964 kJ (469 kcal), protein 24.9 g, fat 28.8 g, carbohydrate 34.9 g, Ca 521 mg, Mg 298 mg, P 841 mg, Fe 10.0 mg, vitamin A 62 IU, thiamin 0.54 mg, riboflavin 0.38 mg, niacin 7.9 mg, ascorbic acid 3 mg (USDA, 2003).
The seeds and leaves contain a glucosinolate, sinigrin. Their pungent taste appears when cells are damaged; sinigrin is then hydrolyzed by an enzyme, myrosinase, and forms allyl isothiocyanate. The seed also contains sterols, the most important of which are brassicasterol, campesterol and sitosterol. The oil content of the seeds is 28–45%, with an average of about 35%. The oil is similar to that of other Brassica species, and is composed of erucic acid 25–55%, oleic acid 8–33%, linoleic acid 12–21%, linolenic acid 8–14%, eicosenoic acid 6– 12%, palmitic acid 2–4%, stearic acid 0.8–1.5%, arachidic acid 0.5–1.2%, palmitoleic acid 0.2–0.5%, nervonic acid 0–2%, behenic acid 0–1%, lignoceric acid 0–1%. Eicosenoic acid and erucic acid are long chain fatty acids that have antinutritional and toxic properties. Cultivars producing oil low in eicosenoic acid and erucic acid have been selected. Their fatty acid composition is as follows: palmitic acid 56%, stearic acid 25%, arachidic acid 10%, behenic acid 6%, lignoceric acid 3% (USDA 2002). They are generally recognized as fit for human consumption. Like cultivars of Brassica napus and Brassica rapa that provide similar oil, they are referred to in Canada as “canola”. The residual cake after oil extraction contains about 37% crude protein.
Experiments carried out on rats seem to indicate that brown mustard would have a beneficial action in attenuating the damage caused by oxidative stress linked to diabetes and its complications.
Adulterations and substitutes
Mustard greens are often mistakenly called “rape leaves” in English, but rapeseed (Brassica napus) is a separate species, grown as a vegetable and oilseed. Brown mustard, as a leafy vegetable, can be easily replaced by green cabbages (special cultivars of Brassica oleracea, Brassica carinata and Brassica napus), although these do not have the typical taste of brown mustard.
Description
Erect, annual or biennial herb up to 160 cm tall, often unbranched, sometimes with long ascending branches in upper part, almost glabrous to sparsely hairy, slightly glaucous; taproot sometimes swollen (tuberous mustard).
Leaves alternate, pinnately lobed, but the upper leaves are often simple; stipules absent; all the leaves have a short petiole; blade ovate to lanceolate, or with one or two lobes on each side and a larger terminal lobe, up to 30 cm × 10 cm, margin irregularly toothed.
Inflorescence: initially an umbel shaped raceme, but later strongly elongating, up to 60 cm long.
Flowers bisexual, regular, 4 merous; pedicel ascending, 5–12 mm long; sepals oblong, 4–6 mm long, green; petals obovate, 6–10 mm long, clawed, bright yellow; stamens 6; ovary superior, cylindrical, 2 celled, stigma globose.
Fruit a linear silique, 2.5–7.5 cm × 2–3.5 mm, often constricted between the seeds, with a conical beak usually over 6 mm in length, dehiscent, up to 20 seeded .
Seeds globose, 1–1.5 mm in diameter, finely reticulate, pale to dark brown.
Other botanical data
Brassica juncea is an extremely variable species, which has been cultivated for centuries as a vegetable and oilseed plant, and it is also a widespread weed. Brassica juncea cultivars have leaves that are only slightly glaucous, often dark green and more or less hairy, distinguishable from the bluish green, hairless leaves of other Brassicas grown as leafy vegetables. In Africa it has often been confused with Brassica carinata, but the lower leaves of the latter species are simple or have at most one lobe on each side, and the beak of the fruit is shorter (usually < 6 mm).
Various authors have proposed classifications of Brassica juncea cultivars. They have little interest in Africa, where farmers most often use local cultivars. Only occasionally are seeds imported from Western seed companies, e.g. ‘Florida Broad Leaf’.
Growth and development
Germination occurs within 5 days after sowing at 20–25°C. Under good conditions the plants grow rapidly, and the leaves can be harvested after 3 weeks, when the plants bear 6–8 fully developed leaves, but
