Basella alba (malabar spinach) cabidigitallibrary

Overview
Malabar (Ceylon) spinach, Basella alba, is a fast-growing perennial, often grown as an annual, glabrous, succulent vine, up to 10 m in length. The first harvest of young shoots and leaves can be about 40 days after planting. It probably originated in India and it has grown in South-east Asia, China and India since ancient times. It is propagated from seed or stem cuttings and can be found along roadsides and as a weed on arable land. Basella is now cultivated in Africa, tropical America and tropical Asia, particularly in moist lowlands. The thick fleshy leaves and young shoots are cooked, boiled or fried, and eaten as a slightly mucilaginous vegetable. It is rich in vitamins A and C, iron and calcium.
Summary of Invasiveness
Basella alba is a herbaceous, perennial vine cultivated as a leafy vegetable and ornamental in tropical and subtropical and occasionally extending into temperate regions as an annual. It is listed as a potential environmental weed in Australia and as a weed of sugarcane fields on Iriomote Island, Japan. The species is considered an invasive species in Cambodia, China, Philippines, Taiwan, Hawaii, Cuba, Colombia, Ecuador, French Polynesia, Palau, Papua New Guinea and the US Minor Outlying Islands. Although no details of its invasiveness are provided, B. alba can grow rampantly in ideal conditions and can become invasive if not properly managed when it is in cultivation. Given that species reproduces easily, by seeds and vegetatively, and grows quickly, B. alba has a great capacity to become invasive in suitable areas. More information is needed on this species’ invasiveness and its impacts to properly assess how it is affecting habitats and other species, and determine the risk it poses to countries where it is not yet invasive.
Description
The following description is from Flora of Panama (2017):
Succulent glabrous herb becoming a slender, twining vine, the stems at first stout, to 2 cm thick, green, after several months of growth and attaining height of 15-45 cm, narrowing, sometimes abruptly and becoming slender, elongate and climbing. Leaves sessile or short petiolate, 4-7 cm long, entire, fleshy, ovate, often broadly so, the juvenile leaves often larger, apically rounded, obtuse or acute, basally cuneate, truncate, or cordate, the lateral venation somewhat obscure, ca. 5 veins on each side, minor venation obscure; petioles stout, to 8 cm long or wanting. Inflorescences axillary or subterminal spikes to 15 cm long, the rachis stout or slender depending on the maturity of the plant; flowers subsessile or pedicellate on juvenile forms, situated on the apical portion of the rachis; bract scale-like; bracteoles calyx-like, 1-2 mm long, acute. Flowers perfect, sepals white, pink, or red, 3-5 mm long, united to above the middle, urceolate to cylindrical, the 5 lobes broad, short, cucullate; stamens included, inserted at the base of the perianth lobes, the filaments short, the anthers cordate, included; ovary conical, l-locular, sometimes partitioned, the 3 styles slender, papillose pilose. Fruit a dark purple or black baccate drupe, the perianth parts enlarged, succulent and enveloping the globose seed and ovary.
Three types can be distinguished: (i) the most common type with dark green, ovate or almost round leaves; (ii) with red stems and reddish, ovate to almost round leaves, often planted as an ornamental; and (iii) with heart-shaped, dark green leaves (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008).
List of Pests
Major host of:
Cercospora basellae-albae; Macrophomina phaseolina (charcoal rot of bean/tobacco); Megymenum brevicorne
Minor host of:
Achatina fulica (giant African land snail); Alternaria alternata (alternaria leaf spot); Athelia rolfsii (sclerotium rot); Cochliobolus lunatus (head mould of grasses, rice and sorghum); Drosophila suzukii (spotted wing drosophila); Halyomorpha halys (brown marmorated stink bug); Pratylenchus penetrans (nematode, northern root lesion); Thanatephorus cucumeris (many names, depending on host); Verticillium dahliae (verticillium wilt)
Associated with (not a host):
Meloidogyne incognita (root-knot nematode); Meloidogyne javanica (sugarcane eelworm)
Host of (source-data mining):
Alternaria tenuissima (nailhead spot of tomato); Basella rugose mosaic virus; Bemisia tabaci (tobacco whitefly); Colletotrichum truncatum (soyabean anthracnose); Cucumber mosaic virus (cucumber mosaic); Pythium aphanidermatum (damping-off)
Distribution
The exact origin of B. alba is not known, and many resources give conflicting information. It has been reported as native to Africa and/or Asia, but without conclusive evidence (PIER, 2017). For example, it is listed as native to the Indian Subcontinent, South East Asia and New Guinea in the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families (WCSP, 2017), but as introduced in those areas by other sources (Acevedo-Rodríguez and Strong, 2012; PIER, 2017; USDA-ARS, 2017). Eriksson (2007) reports the species as possibly native to Africa based on the occurrence of what he considers to be natural populations, but he also reports that its cultivation and subsequent naturalization has obscured its origin. Pollen records from Lake Malawi in East Africa provide evidence for B. alba being present in that region during the Pleistocene (DeBusk, 1998). Asia is often attributed as the place of origin of B. alba due to its cultivation in South East Asia and China since ancient times (PROTA, 2017), and as Linnaeus corrected the locality information of the type specimen from Syria to China in the second edition of Species Plantarum (Cook, 2010).
It is now widely cultivated in the tropics, extending to the subtropics and even to temperate zones as an annual (PROTA, 2017). In tropical Africa, it is common in warm, humid regions (PROTA, 2017). The species is present in Asia, Africa, North America, Central America, the Caribbean, South America; Europe, Asia and Oceania (Acevedo-Rodríguez and Strong, 2012; Flora of North America, 2017; India Biodiversity Portal, 2017; PFAF, 2017; PROTA, 2017; PIER, 2017; USDA-ARS, 2017; ZipcodeZoo, 2017).
Risk of Introduction
Basella alba has a high risk of introduction. The species is widely cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas where it is grown primarily as a vegetable (PROTA, 2017; Useful Tropical Plants, 2017). It is also widely used as an ornamental worldwide, its popularity extending into temperate areas where grows as an annual (PFAF, 2017). It has the potential to be intentionally introduced into countries or areas where the species is still not reported, as seeds and plants are available in many countries and sold via the internet. The species is also available at local markets and nurseries (PROTA, 2017). B. alba also has commercial potential for other uses in the food, cosmetic and dye industries (PFAF, 2017; PROTA, 2017).
Means of Movement and Dispersal
Natural Dispersal
Basella alba often grows near rivers and streams so it is possible that it is dispersed by water (PIER, 2017).
Vector Transmission (Biotic)
The fruits are eaten by birds, possibly acting as dispersers (Iplantz, 2020).
Intentional Introduction
Basella alba has been introduced worldwide as an ornamental, a vegetable and to be used in ethnobotany since ancient times (PROTA, 2017).
Similarities to Other Species/Conditions
Basella alba can be confused with Anredera cordifolia. A. cordifolia can be distinguished from B. alba by its slender racemes of pedicellate, non-fleshy flowers (PROTA, 2017).
Habitat
Basella alba is reported as growing in thickets, hills, moist and dry deciduous forests, forest edges, plains, scrub jungle, cliffs, margins of cultivated land, near rivers or streams, cultivated near houses, clearings and disturbed areas (African Plant Database, 2020; India Biodiversity Portal, 2017; PIER, 2017).
Biology and Ecology
Genetics
There are no reports of hybrids in cultivation or in the wild for B. alba (PIER, 2017). The chromosome numbers reported for the species are 2n=44,48 (PROTA, 2017). Germplasm resources are available at The World Vegetable Center and at USDA-ARS facilities (Hughes and Ebert, 2013; USDA-ARS, 2017). DNA barcodes are available for this species at Barcode of Life Data System (BOLDS, 2017).
The species is reported by Ganashan et al. (1996) as showing high genetic diversity in Sri Lanka.
Reproductive Biology
Basella alba reproduces by seeds and vegetatively by stem cuttings and rhizomes (PIER, 2017; PROTA, 2017). It will also form roots when stem nodes touch the ground (Dave’s Garden, 2017). Pollination is cleistogamous although some pollination by short-tongued insects is reported (Bogle, 1969).
No breeding programmes are known to exist, although several seed companies in India and the United States produce seeds to be sold locally and internationally (PROTA, 2017).
Physiology and Phenology
Basella alba will not flower if the length of daylight is more than 13 hours per day (Useful Tropical Plants, 2017). It is reported as flowering from May to September and fruiting from July to August (ZipcodeZoo, 2017). The seeds require temperatures of 18 - 21°C and 10-21 days to germinate. Pre-soaking the seeds for 24 hours in warm water will shorten the germination time. The species can produce mature fruits within 70 days of planting in warm climates (PIER, 2017).
Longevity
Basella alba is a perennial vine that is variously reported as being short and long lived (PROTA, 2017; Csurhes and Edwards,1998). If not taken care of, it tends to die back after two or more years. With fertilizers, the plants can be maintained for long periods. In subtropical and temperate regions, it behaves like an annual as it is frost intolerant and will not do well if night temperature drops below 14°C (Missouri Botanical Garden, 2017a).
Environmental Requirements
The growth of B. alba is limited by low temperatures, altitudes higher than 500 m and day/night temperature variations (PIER, 2017). Although it is cultivated worldwide up to 2600 m elevation and in tropical, subtropical and temperate areas, the species will grow best in hot, dry to humid climates and in areas below 500 m elevation (PROTA; 2017; ZipcodeZoo, 2017). The optimum mean annual temperatures for B. alba are 23 to 27°C, but it can tolerate a temperature range of 10 to 35°C. It does not tolerate frost and requires a minimum daytime temperature of 15°C. It does not do well if night temperature drops below 14°C, but will tolerate night temperatures occasionally falling below 10°C. It prefers an annual precipitation range of 2000 to 2500 mm, but will tolerate 700 to 4200 mm. The species prefers well-drained fertile sandy loam soils and full sun to light shade situations. It can grow in soils with a pH range of 5.5 – 7, but can tolerate 4.3 - 7.5. It tolerates poor soils and short periods of drought (Useful Tropical Plants, 2017). It is intolerant to salinity and standing water (PROTA, 2017).