Pharmacognostical Standardization of Upodika  Basella alba L.: An Important Ayurvedic Antidiabetic Plant

Objective:
To establish the pharmacognostic standards for the correct identification and standardization of an important Antidiabetic plant described in Ayurveda.
Materials and Methods:
Standardization was carried out on the leaf and stem of Basella alba L. with the help of the macro morphological, microscopic, physicochemical and qualitative phytochemical studies.
Results:
Several specific characters were identified viz. clustered calcium oxalate crystals in the cortex region, absence of trichomes, succulent, thick, mucilaginous, fibrous stem. Rubiaceous type of stomata on both sides of the leaf. Quantitative microscopy along with physicochemical and qualitative phytochemical analysis were also established.
Conclusion:
The pharmacognostic standards could serve as the reference for the proper identification of the Basella alba L. which is an important anti diabetic plant described in Ayurveda.
Keywords: Anti diabetic, Basella alba, microscopy, standardization, thin layer chromatography
Go to:
Introduction
Upodikā commonly known as Bāyibasale soppu in Kannada (local language, Karnataka, India) which is botanically equated to Basella alba L. belonging to family Basellaceae, which is an extremely heat tolerant fast growing perennial vine.[1,2,3] It is also known as Malabar spinach, Indian spinach, Ceylon spinach, country spinach and wine spinach. It is a glabrous herb, fleshy, perennial, much branched creeping climbing herb. Leaves simple, alternate, petiolate, sub succulent, broadly ovate, acute or acuminate, cordate at base. Inflorescence in spike, flowers white or red, bracteoles longer than perianth. Fruits red, white, black, globose, utricle enclosed in the perianth [Figure 6]. It is cultivated at homes as a pot herb because of its high nutritive value.[4] It is further observed that two common species i.e., the red stemmed B. rubra and the green stemmed B. alba is found in India which are indistinguishable in taste. Ayurveda recommends Basella in the treatment of several conditions such as anaemia, cough, dysentery and diarrhoea and as a poultice and in the treatment of mouth ulcers in south India.[5]
An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is ASL 36 35 g006.jpg
Figure 6
Basella alba   Habitat
B. alba is reported to contain several phytoconstituents such as proteins, alkaloids, carbohydrates, polysaccharides, phenols, flavonoids, carotenoids, minerals and vitamins.[4,6,7] It is also an important ethno veterinary medicinal plant used for the treatment of retained after birth and anaplasmosis and administered in balanitis and gonorrhoea. The mucilaginous liquid obtained from the leaves and tender stalks of this plant is a remedy for habitual headaches. A decoction of the leaves is a good laxative for pregnant women and children,[8] apart from this, it was also reported that daily consumption of B. alba has a positive effect on total body vitamin A stores in men.[9] It has immense potential activity on diabetes and this has been scientifically well established. The aqueous extract of B. alba leaf exhibited anti diabetic effect on alloxan induced diabetic rats.[10] The mucilage present in B. alba has been credited with hypoglycaemic activity.[11] It also possess CNS depressant activity, gastro protective activity,[12,13] anti inflammatory activity,[14,15] membrane stabilization property in human blood cell membrane,[16] antibacterial activity,[17] wound healing and anti ulcer activity.[18,19] B. alba is consumed in food preparations in southern India. In Ayurveda the drug is used for various indications either alone or in combination for mada (intoxication), anidrā (insomnia), paādadari (cracked feet), jvara (fever), pravaāhikaā (dysentery), arśhas (haemorrhoids), śiātapitta (urticaria), vranaśotha (inflammatory), arbuda (tumours), raktapitta (bleeding disorders).[20,21,22] The plant is used in Ayurveda treatment for cancer management.[23] Pharmacognostic profile of the B. alba hasn‘t yet been carried out and hence the present work focuses on its pharmacognostic profile.[24]
Materials and Methods
Plant collection and processing
The fresh samples of plants Upodikā (Basale soppu in Kannada language, Karnataka, India) Basella alba L., (leaf and stem), were collected from different vegetable markets of Bangalore (K. R. Puram, Krishna Rajendra and Jayanagar vegetable markets, Bangalore, India) and the plants were identified with the help of Bangalore Flora and from Survey of Medicinal Plant Unit, NADRI, Bangalore. The plant material was processed in the form of herbarium, and deposited in RRCBI Herbarium, Bangalore for the future reference (Voucher Specimen 12357). The plant material was washed with water removal of foreign objects and shade dried. It was then milled to coarse powder, kept in paper bags and stored at ambient temperature until use.
Organoleptic evaluation
Organoleptic evaluation was done by observing the leaf and stem with the naked eyes and taking note of the colour, size, odour and other diagnostic parameters.
Microscopic, histochemical and histological analysis
Different parts of the plants such as stem and leaf were soaked in 70% alcohol for 24 hours, and free hand sections were taken, cleared with chloral hydrate solution and water, stained with saffranin according to the standard prescribed methods. Photomicrographs were captured with Nikon Digital camera and Cat cam camera. Powder and Maceration studies were also carried out following the standard methods.[25,26]
Quantitative microscopy
Quantitative studies were carried out for stomatal index, vein islet number and palisade ratio from laminar region and then mean average values were calculated from different observations, followed by standard methods.[27]
Physico chemical analysis
Physico chemical analysis such as ash values, extractive values were carried out according to the standard procedures prescribed in Ayurvedic Pharmacopeia of India and preliminary phytochemical screening was carried out as per the standard methods and procedure.[27]
Phytochemical screening
Preliminary phytochemical screening was carried out for different extracts by using standard procedures.[28]
Thin layer chromatography profile
Dried stem and leaf samples were extracted with petroleum ether, chloroform and methanol at room temperature with rotary shaker. TLC studies of these extracts were carried out by using commercially available precoated plates with standardized adsorption layers, i.e., Silica gel 60 F254, (Merck, Germany). All the solvents systems were selected by trial and error basis. The chromatograms were developed in twin through glass chambers on 10 × 10 cm plates till the mobile phase travelled up to a distance of 8 cm from starting point. After development, the plates were dried at room temperature for 5 10 minutes and observed under UV 254. Photographs were taken and the Rf values were recorded.[29]
Results
Macroscopic characters
Dried stem was pale green, compressed. Mature stem was hard, fibrous, hard to break up by hand, surface rough, winged, and triangular. Petiole 1 3 cm long, midrib protruding at the lower side and grooved at the upper side, odour pleasant and taste slightly sweetish. Leaves were simple, thick, 3 9 × 2 8 cm, smooth above, glaucous beneath, base was shallowly cordate or round, margin entire, apex acuminate, smell agreeable, tasting sweetish and mucilaginous.
Microscopic characters of stem, petiole and leaf
T.S. of stem shows star shaped with five extended wings with single layer of epidermis, made up of parenchymatous cells covered by a thin layer of cuticle, followed by an epidermis of two to three layers. The hypodermis is composed of compactly arranged polygonal parenchymatous cells without any inter cellular spaces. Besides the hypodermis, cortex region is formed by 6 10 layers of compactly arranged polygonal thin walled parenchymatous cells followed by the cortex, 3 4 layers of compactly arranged sclerenchymatous layer of cells (pericycle), where vascular bundles are collateral, conjoint and closed. In the centre portion, pith region shows compactly arranged parenchymatous cells with simple and compound starch grains in groups and with clustered calcium oxalate crystals [Figure 1].
T.S. of petiole is strongly convex and spherical on the lower side. A central narrow groove on the upper surface and two lateral narrow winged extensions on either side and shows a single layer of epidermis. Epidermis made up of single layer of rectangular cells covered with thin cuticle. It is followed by 8 to 10 layers of tangentially elongated thin walled parenchymatous cells forming the ground tissue. Calcium oxalate crystals abundantly present in this region. Most of the calcium oxalate crystals present in the narrow winged extensions and some crystals are present close to the vascular bundle region. The collateral meristele shows 3 7 vascular bundles that face each other laterally [Figure ​[Figure2a2a and ​andbb].
T.S. of the leaf through midrib region [Figure 2c] was convex at the lower side and grooved at the upper side, young leaf showed bicollateral meristeles in the centre, getting connected forming a single meristele encircled by a parenchymatous ring of pericycle in mature leaf. Parenchyma cells are 3 4 layers are in the narrow groove at the upper side, 5 to 6 layers towards the lower side. These cells are polygonal and compactly arranged without any air spaces. Clustered calcium oxalate crystals are present abundantly in the ground tissue region of the leaf. Most of the calcium oxalate crystals are present in the narrow winged extensions in laminar region, few crystals are also present close to meristele region. The single layered epidermis cells are rectangular, arranged compactly and covered by a thin cuticle and traversed with stomata. The laminar mesophyll region showed one to two layers of compactly arranged palisade parenchyma cells, two to four layers of loosely arranged spongy parenchyma cells, the calcium oxalate crystals were present abundantly in the upper layer of palisade parenchyma cells and were absent in the spongy parenchyma cells. Spongy parenchyma cells showed simple and compound starch grains in groups [Figure 2d].
Powder microscopy of stem, leaf and maceration study
Stem powder was light green in colour, smell agreeable, taste slightly sweetish and mucilaginous. Under microscope, it exhibits fragments of different tissues. Epidermal cells in surface view which were polygonal and tangentially elongated thin walled parenchymatous cells, single rosette calcium oxalate crystals, helical vessels, pitted xylem vessels, spiral xylem vessels, reticulate and thickened helical vessels in groups, elongated fibre and parenchymatous cells, single stomata and prism shaped crystals [Figure 3].


