A REVIEW ON UPODIKA (BASELLA RUBRA LINN.) – AN AYURVEDIC NUTRACEUTICAL WITH ENORMOUS MEDICINAL VALUE

ABSTRACT
Basella rubra Linn. is a plant of the family Basellaceae, generally
known by names such as malabar spinach, indian spinach, ceylon
spinach and vine spinach. It is widely accepted as nutritional vegetable
and grown generally in the tropical regions of the world. In India it is
widely grown as pot herb. Different studies have proved that the plant
is rich in vitamin A, vitamin C, flavonoids, saponins, carotenoids,
many amino acids, organic acids, calcium and iron,. It was used to treat
large number of human ailments as mentioned in various Samhitas and
Nighantus. Major biological activities exhibited by Basella rubra is
androgenic, antiulcer, antioxidant, cytotoxic, antibacterial activity, anti-inflammatory, central
nervous system (CNS) depressant activity, nephroprotective, antidiabetic, antimicrobial,
antiviral, hepatoprotective, sleep inducing and wound healing properties. Besides these
activities, the plant possess a valuable ethnomedicinal importance .It nourishes, makes the
body stout, purifies blood, rejuvenates and acts as aphrodisiac. Adding it to regular diet
would help in preventing weakness of bones, anemia, cardiovascular diseases ,cancers of
colon and constipation, Traditionally, it is used in treating mouth ulcers, wound,
inflammation, urticaria, anemia, malnutrition, insomnia, cracked feet, piles, bleeding
disorders, cancers etc.
INTRODUCTION
Traditional medicine can be defined as application of health practices, knowledge and beliefs
via using plants, animals and mineral based medicines, therapies, manual techniques andexercises, either singularly or in combination to treat, diagnose and prevent illnesses or
maintain well being. Medicinal plant refers to any substance having properties that can be
used for therapeutic purposes or as precursors for the synthesis of various drugs. Medicinal
plants various biologically active compounds such as carbohydrates, proteins, enzymes, fats
and oils, minerals, vitamins, alkaloids, terpenoids, carotenoids, sterols, phenols, glycosides,
tannins, saponins, etc. Over the years, Traditional medicine is undoubtedly a reliable
alternative approach to healthcare delivery in the metropolis because it is cheap, easily
accessible, efficacious and offers a natural way to treat numerous human ailments. The
majority of rural dwellers do not have access to modern health care, so they mostly depend
on medicinal plant to prevent or eliminate diseases. Thus, there is need to incorporate
medicinal plants and herbal remedies as potential sources of new drugs. Despite the
availability of millions of chemically synthesized drug for a number of diseases; the natural
products of plant origin has remained the most important and valuable source of new drugs.
One such medicinal herb is Basella rubra.
Basella rubra L. (Basellaceae), commonly known as Indian or Malabar spinach belongs to
family Basellaceae, is an herbaceous annual or biennial climbing herb found in tropical and
sub-tropical areas. It is a succulent, branched, smooth, twining herbaceous vine, several
meters in length. Stems are purplish or green. Leaves are fleshy, having ovate or heart-shape,
length of 5 to 12 cms, stalked, tapering to a pointed tip and a cordate base. Fruit is fleshy,
stalkless, ovoid or spherical, 5-6 mm long, and purple when mature and contain only oneseed. The seeds are round or oval shaped and black in color. The flowers are pink.[1] Due to
easy adaptation to a variety of soils and climates Malabar spinach is considered one of the
best tropical spinach throughout the tropical world.
[2]
It is one of the wild leafy vegetables,
which is rare in its natural habitat[3]
but nowadays it is an important leafy vegetable grown for
its nutritive value[4]
throughout the temperate regions as an annual and the tropics as a
perennial.
[5] Almost in every part of India, Basella is grown as a pot herb.MATERIALS AND METHODS
This paper includes the evidence-based overview of pharmacological and phytochemical
properties and ethnobotanical uses of the Basella rubra, which may be helpful to establish a
standard natural drug for further research. The present article provides Review on Basella
rubra Linn. Collecting information on the various pharmacological studies conducted till
date.VERNACULAR NAMES
English Name - Indian spinach, Malabar spinach, Ceylon spinach, Vine spinach; Sanskrit
Name – Pothaki, Upodika, Maalava; Hindi name - Poya, pol, Lalbachlu; Bengali Name -
Poome, Puishaka; Marathi Name - Maayala, Velbendi, Mayalu; Gujarati Name - Pothi, poimopal; Kannada Name - Basale soppu; Tulu Name-Basale; Telugu: bachhali; Malayalam
Name- Vasalaccira, Cheera, Vallicheera; Tamil Name -Basalakira, Vasalakkirai, Kodip
pasalai, Kodip pasali; Konkani Name - Valchi bhaji; Manipuri Name - Urok Shumbal; OriyaPoi saga; Chinese - Lo kwai, Luo kai Chan cai; Spanish-espnaca de Malabar; Mexicanespinaca.china; Japanese-tsurumurasaki; French-baselle; German-indischer spinat; 
Portuguese: Bertalha,; Filipino: Alugbati,; Sinhalese: VelNiviti (Sudu),; Danish: indisk
spinat,; Dutch: ceylonspinazie; Indonesian: gondola; Italian: spinacio della cina; Javanese:
jingga; Kikuyu: murerema; Nepalese: poi sagg; Swedish: indisk spenat,; Thai: phak plang,;
Turkish: pazu; Vietnamese: mong toi.
SYNONYMS
Pothaki, upodika, Maalava, Matsyakaali, Phalambika, Vrinthaka, Turangi, Kantaki,
Madaghni Chichila, Vrinta madalika.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
Basella rubra Linn. Belonging to the family Basellaceae, is widely distributed in the tropics
and often cultivated in warm temperate areas of both the eastern and western hemisphere.
Watt stated that it is cultivated in almost whole of India, especially in lower Bengal and
Assam where it is an important part of diet. In Bengal almost every village has a hedgrew of
it, the succulent leaves and stems are used as a pot herb by all classes.
[7]
According to Burkhill, Basella rubra Linn. is grown throughout Malaya and used as pot herb.
Its leaves are used to poultice sore in both India and Malaya. The laxative property of the
plant is used for treating constipation in children in Indonesia. It is considered as food plant
in the Philippine, and boiled and eaten like spinach. It is cultivated extensively by Chinese
gardener and is on sale in Manila market throughout the year. The white variety had been
introduced into Fiji shortly before 1956. It has been also reported from Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Sierra and Camroons.
PHYTOCHEMISTRY AND CHEMICAL CONSTITUENTS
Basella rubra Linn. is a rich source of nutrients and minerals. Sheela et al., (2004) have
analyzed macronutrients composition of Basella rubra on dry weight basis and mentioned
that the plant contains carbohydrate = 0.4g., energy = 31kcal., fat = 1.9g, fiber = 0.3g.,
moisture = 93% and protein = 3.3 g, while the micronutrient composition and oxalic acid
content were ascorbic acid = 15mg., calcium = 187mg., iron = 5.45mg., and oxalic acid = 60
to 84mg. per 100g of edible portion.
BIOLOGICAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
Antibacterial activity
Basella rubra leaves on performing cup plate diffusion method shown that aqueous, ethanol
and petroleum ether extracts of the leaves exhibited antibacterial activity against E. coli,
Vibrio cholera, Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus typhi.[23]
Antiulcer activity
The gastric ulcers in the rats were induced by giving the treatment of ethanol and pyrolous
and then the treated animals were fed with aqueous extracts of Basella rubra leaves. It was
found that, the treatment of Basella rubra aqueous leaf extract in the ratio of 10mg/kg and
20mg/kg had significant and dose dependent antiulcer activity.
[BIOLOGICAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
Antibacterial activity
Basella rubra leaves on performing cup plate diffusion method shown that aqueous, ethanol
and petroleum ether extracts of the leaves exhibited antibacterial activity against E. coli,
Vibrio cholera, Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus typhi.[23]
Antiulcer activity
The gastric ulcers in the rats were induced by giving the treatment of ethanol and pyrolous
and then the treated animals were fed with aqueous extracts of Basella rubra leaves. It was
found that, the treatment of Basella rubra aqueous leaf extract in the ratio of 10mg/kg and
20mg/kg had significant and dose dependent antiulcer activity.
The aqueous extract of Basella rubra Linn. possesses significant and dose dependent antiulcer and cytoprotective effects. The aqueous extract of Basella rubra Linn. has demonstrated
antiulcer activity and leaves masticated kept in mouth helped relief aphthae.[25]
Activity on Kidney and Liver
Basella rubra aqueous leaf extract in Wistar albino rats is studied and evaluated on the basis
of various parameters of kidney and liver. The Wistar albino rats of either sex were grouped
into four groups. The first group was treated as control and fed with PBS (phosphate buffer
saline) while second, third and fourth groups animals were orally administered with 300
mg/kg, 200 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg of aqueous leaf extracts respectively. All the rats were
administered with a particular dose once a day for about two weeks. After that the animals
were scarified using cervical dislocation, kidney and liver from animals were excised and
used for further studies. It was observed that all the parts of the liver and kidney were well
preserved which indicated that plant extracts had no adverse effects on the histology of
kidney and liver in Wistar albino rats.[26]
Haematological activity
The effects of aqueous and ethanol extracts of Basella rubra leaf extracts for the
determination of haematological parameters of normal Swiss mice and amylase activity in
Wistar rats were analysed. It was observed that the haematological parameters like WBC,
RBC, Hb and PCV were significantly increased in the animals after got treated with the 100
mg/kg body weight (bw) of ethanolic extract. The biochemical parameters of serum for
estimation of total bilrubin content were determined and it was reported that the animals
treated with 200 (mg/kg body weight) aqueous extract and ethanolic extract of Basella rubra
leaf had considerable increase in the bilrubin content. The amylase activity in experimental
animals with three different extracts i. e. aqueous, ethanol and hexane in the ratio of 200
mg/kg body weight was also determined. After the proper treatment the animals were
scarified and ana urine samples were analysed for determination of amylase activity which
was found more in the animals treated with hexane extract. Thus the study supported the fact
that the Basella rubra leaves, traditionally are used in the treatment of anaemia and also has
hepatoprotective potential.[27]
Hepatoprotective activity
The hepatoprotective activity of aqueous ethanol extracts of Basella rubra aerial parts was
studied against carbon tetrachloride and paracetamol induced hepatotoxicity in rats. The Wistar rats that were administered with carbon tetrachloride and paracetamol showed
increase in activities of AST, ALT, and ALP with increase in serum bilrubin level which
indicates development of hepatic injury. The increased activities and bilrubin level were
significantly decreased and bought to the normal conditions when the intoxicated rats were
fed with ethanol extract of Basella rubra. Depending on this study it was reported that the
Basella rubra ethanol extract has a protective effect on improvement of the functional
integrity of liver cells.[28]
Antidiabetic activity in relationship with the antioxidant property
The hypoglycemic effect of aqueous leaf extract of Basella rubra with that of streptozotocin
(STZ) in two months old male albino rats was studied. After a month of proper treatment all
the experimented rats were scarified and the antidiabetic properties was analysed. The results
reported that the rats treated with Basella rubra pulp significantly bought back the blood
glucose level.[29]
The antioxidant properties of plant leaf extract was studied and reported that the levels of
liver enzymatic antioxidants such as catalase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidases
and non enzymatic antioxidants like vitamin C, vitamin E and reduced glutathione
significantly increased in the animals treated with the Basella rubra pulp. Thus the findings
suggested that the plant has hypoglycemic and antioxidant properties.[30]
The aerial plant parts of Basella rubra were lypolized and homogenized into powder. Then
various in vitro assays, such as DPPH, ABTS, reducing power, hydroxyl radical scavenging
activity, superoxide radical scavenging activity and nitric oxide radical scavenging activity,
metal ion chelating ability and peroxidation inhibition activity were performed to evaluate an
antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities for aqueous, methanol and acetone extracts.
It was observed that all the extracts shown reducing power and effectively inhibited hydroxyl
radicals, nitric oxide radical and superoxide radical. Research explained that almost all the
extracts exhibited a considerable amount of total phenolic content and vitamin C rangingfrom 31.1- 34.5 mg TAE/g and 39.5 – 42.8 mg AAE/g respectively. It was also concluded
that aqueous extract showed total tannins about 10.3±4.7 mg TAE/g, while the flavonoids in
maximum quantity were obtained in acetone extract about 16.9±1.6 mg RE/gAntifungal activity
Two novel antifungal peptides, designated α- and β-basrubrins, respectively, isolated from
seeds of the Basella rubra Linn. α- and β-basrubrins exhibited a molecular weight of 4.3 and
5 kDa, respectively. The translation in a rabbit reticulocyte system with an IC50 value of 400
and 100nM, respectively was inhibited by them. α- and β-basrubrin also inhibited HIV-1
reverse transcriptase by (79.4 ± 7.8)% and (54.6 ± 3.6)%, respectively, at a concentration of
40μM, and (10.56 ± 0.92)% and (2.12 ± 0.81)%, respectively, at a concentration of 40μM.
Both α- and β-basrubrins exerted potent antifungal activity toward Botrytis cinerea,
Mycosphaerella arachidicola, and Fusarium oxysporum. Neither α-basrubrin nor β-basrubrins
exhibited DNase, RNase, Lectin protease activity, indicating that their antifungal action is not
due to these activities. The heat shock protein-like peptide and serine–threonine kinase-like
protein exhibited a molecular mass of 3 and 30 kDa, respectively. They inhibited neither
translation in a rabbit reticulocyte system at concentrations up to 50 μM nor HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase activity at concentrations up to 400 μM.[32]
Anticancer activity
Fruit extracts of Basella rubra Linn. were investigated for their antioxidant and anticancer
activities against human cervical carcinoma (SiHa) cells. The fruits were contained with total
betalain contents of 0.34 g/100 g fresh weight and 1.9 g/100 g dry weight. Betanin, isobetanin
and gomphrenin I were identified as the major pigments along with Phenolic compounds.
Both water and aqueous methanol extracts of fruits exhibited significant free radical
scavenging potential and ferric reducing antioxidant power. Fruit extracts at 50 mg/mL
showed strong (81%) cytotoxic activity against human cervical carcinoma cells. Thus, fruit
extracts have potential application for cancer treatments and as nutraceutical or dietary
supplements.
[33]
The plant and leaves are ground with sour buttermilk and salt for preparing a
poultice and which is indicated for arbuda.
[34]
Antioxidant activity
The investigation of antioxidant activity of two species of leafy vegetable Basella was done.
The leaves of Basella are low in calories (95–110/100 g) and fats, but rich in vitaminsminerals, and antioxidants. The EC50 values in BAW extract (3.4 mg/mL) were high for
DPPH radical scavenging activity. BAW extract (1.04) at 50mg/mL reported high ferric
reducing antioxidant power and least in BAM extract. Various extracts from leaves with
different constituents were shown dose dependent antioxidant and high scavenging abilities which play a key role in combating the reactive oxygen species.
[35] Methanolic extracts of all
leafy vegetables tested shown antioxidant activity. The tested leafy vegetable reported better
oxidative activity at 200μg/ml concentration at all temperature. To conclude leafy vegetables
infers a protective radical scavenging activity which exhibit dose dependant stability
irrespective of temperature and it shows substrate specificity.
[36] When fruit flesh was
extracted with 80% methanol (containing 0.2% formic acid) and subjected to solid-phase
extraction, semi preparative HPLC isolation, mass spectrophotometric analysis, and structural
elucidation. The major red pigment known as gomphrenin I, whose quantity increased with
the increase of fruit maturity. The gomphrenin I extract yield from ripe fruits was 36.1
mg/100 g of fresh weight. In addition to gomphrenin I, betanidin-dihexose and isobetanidindihexose were also detected. The antioxidant activities of gomphrenin I determined by Trolox
equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC), α,α-diphenyl-β-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical
scavenging activity, reducing power, and antioxidative capacity assays were equivalent to
534 μM Trolox, 103 μM butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), 129 μM ascorbic acid, and 68 μM
BHT at 180, 23, 45, and 181 μM, respectively. Gomphrenin I act as a principal pigment of
Basella alba fruits and a potent antioxidant and inflammatory inhibitor. These findings
suggest that Basella alba fruit is a rich source of betalains and has value-added potential for
use in the development of food colorants and nutraceuticals.
[37] EtAc extract showed
moderate radical scavenging activity in the DPPH assay. The crushed leaves and the flowers
juice of both species have been used against skin inflammations and the most active extracts
of the plants are likely to be the aqueous extracts. For instance, the aqueous extract of Basella
rubra has demonstrated antiulcer activity and leaves masticated kept in mouth helped relief
aphthae. Therefore, in order to obtain a higher level of pharmacological activities of Basella
alba and Basella rubra, an aqueous extraction could be of interest for further investigation.[38]
Antiviral activity
Verma et al., (1995) reviewed antiviral activity of many plant tissues.
[39]
This property is due
to the presence of ribosome inactivating proteins (with single chain (type I) or two chai
(type II))present in the extracts of plant tissue.[40] Bolognesi (1997) isolated type I RIPs from
the seeds of Basella rubra and tested them for inhibiting infection of Nicotiana benthamiana
by AMVC.
[41]
Liu et al., (2006) studied that the early inoculation of Basella rubra extract on
tobacco plant showed inhibitory effects against tobacco mosaic virus.[42] Dong et al., (2012)
reported structures of acidic polysaccharides from Basella rubra and their effects on herpes
simplex virus type.[43]