Medicinal Properties of Mayalu (Basella alba : Malabar spinach)

Mayalu or Malabar Spinach or Basella alba 
is found mainly in rainy season
in Konkan and almost entire Maharashtra.
It is wildly cultivated, cool season leafy vegetable. 
During monsoon the vegetable is eaten  with relish.
It is a  fast growing  succulent plant with climbing growth habit. Stems are purplish or green. Leaves are fleshy, ovate or heart-shaped. In Maharashtra basella alba or Mayalu is found mainly during rainy season. it is consumed as a  vegetable with main course food.
Unlike other medicinal plant it not very well-known though it has high medicinal  & nutritional value.
The plant is being used in pharma industry for the productio of new plant based drugs.
In Ayurveda and Indian Folk Medicine,
it is widely used
to treat different ailments and conditions.
Parts used : Mainly leaves and stems
are used for medicinal purpose
Chemical composition of leaf extract of Basella alba-
leaf extract include: proteins, fat, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin K, vitamin B9 (folic acid), riboflavin, niacin, thiamine and minerals such as calcium, magnesium and iron.
Basella alba mucilage is rich surce of fiber. mucilage is composed of water soluble polysaccharide, which functions as water retention, germination, food reservoir and secondary metabolite storage. The gel preparation of Basella alba mucilage provide good stability that serve for further development as cosmetic and medicine for skin diseases.  
Antioxidant activity of basella alba is because of it's total phenolic, flavonoid (Kaempherol) and ascorbic acid contents. 
Amino acids like arginine, leucine, isoleucine, lysine, threonine and tryptophan are present in basella alba.
Medicinal properties and  usage -
The plant possess analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-pyretic, antibacterial - antifungal , anti-pruritic, androgenic, anti-oxidant and anti-cancer activities.
The pharmacological activities of Basella alba has been tested by both in-vitro as well as in-vivo methods.
Anaemia -
It is a good source of iron due to its rich iron and ascorbic acid content. Hence it is used in the treatment of anemia. 
Irregular menses -
Paste of root of  red species of Basella alba is taken with rice washed water on empty stomach for a month.
Insomnia -
As per Indian system of medicine the paste of leaves is applied on head to bring sound sleep. It should be applied half an hour before bathing.
Swelling-
Paste of root is applied  to reduce swelling and inflammation
Constipation-
Decoction of leaves used for its mild laxative effects.
Boils and ulcers -
Pulped leaves applied to boils and ulcers to hasten suppuration.
Burns and scalds -
Leaf-juice mixed with butter, is soothing and cooling when applied to burns and scalds.
Headache -
The mucilaginous liquid obtained from the leaves and tender stalks of plants is popular remedy for headaches.
Urticaria -
Paste of leaves is used in the treatment of urticarial rash both orally and externally
Daily consumption of Basella alba has a positive effect on total-body vitamin A stores in men.
Anti cancer -
In India B. alba leaves and stem has been used for anticancer treatment such as melanoma, leukemia and oral cancer. Antioxidant activity, antimutagenic activity has been carried out by the scientist to explore the dynamics of the plant for the advancement in the treatment of the diseases
Knowing that plants have a large number of chemical
substances, which have several pharmacological
actions, it is extensively studied by researchers and
investigators for the synthesis of  newer drugs which
can be helpful in the treatment of many ailments.  


