Basella alba L. Alugbati

Botany
Alugbati is a succulent, branched, smooth, twining herbaceous vine, several meters in length. Stems are purplish or green. Leaves are somewhat fleshy, ovate or heart-shaped, 5 to 12 centimeters long, stalked, tapering to a pointed tip with a cordate base. Spikes are axillary, solitary, 5 to 29 centimeters long. Flowers are pink, about 4 millimeters long. Fruit is fleshy, stalkless, ovoid or nearly spherical, 5 to 6 millimeters long, and purple when mature.
Distribution
Found in settled areas, in hedges, old cultivated areas, etc., throughout the Philippines.
Often cultivated.
Prehistoric introduction.
Also occurs in tropical Asia, Africa, and Malaya.
Constituents
Phytochemical screening of various extracts yielded cardiac glycosides, saponins, tannins, flavonoids, terpenoids, carbohydrates, and reducing sugars.
Study isolated Basellasaponins A, B, C, and D, oleanane-type triterpenes oligoglycosides, together with betavulgaroside 1, spinacoside C, and momordins IIb and IIc, from fresh aerial parts.
Leaves yield saponin, vitamin A and B.
Fruit yields mucilage and iron.
Study of wild Basella rubra showed it to be abundant in carotene, middle in vitamin C, and low in nitrate. Nitrate in planted B. rubra is about twice that of the wild variety.
Properties
Aperient, demulcent, diuretic, emollient, laxative, rubefacient.
Mucilaginous when cooked.
Studies exhibited androgenic, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, antioxidant, antiulcer, antiviral, CNS depressant, hepatoprotective, and wound healing activities.
Uses
Edibility / Nutrition
Common market product, a popular leafy and stew vegetable, and a good substitute for spinach.
The green and purple cultivated varieties are preferable to the wild ones.
Both the young shoots and stems are eaten.
Excellent source of calcium and iron; good source of vitamins A, B, and C, with a high roughage value.
Folkloric
Roots are employed as rubefacient.
Poultice of leaves used to reduce local swelling.
Sap is applied to acne eruptions to reduce inflammation.
Decoction of leaves used for its mild laxative effects.
Pulped leaves applied to boils and ulcers to hasten suppuration.
Sugared juice of leaves useful for catarrhal afflictions in children.
Leaf-juice, mixed with butter, is soothing and cooling when applied to burns and scalds.
In India, used in hemorrhagic diseases and as tonic. Also used for burns and pruritic skin lesions. In Orissa, India, paste of root in rice water taken in the morning on an empty stomach for a month to cure irregular periods.
In Nigeria, leaves used for hypertension. In Cameroonian folk medicine, used for malaria.
Mucilaginous liquid obtained from the leaves and tender stalks used for habitual headaches.
In Ayurveda, used for hemorrhages, skin diseases, sexual weakness, ulcers and as laxative in children. Leaves applied on the head for half a hour before bathing to help bring about a good refreshing sleep. Sap is applied to acne eruptions to reduce inflammation. Decoction of leaves used for a mild laxative effect. Pulped leaves applied to boils and ulcers to hasten suppuration. Leaf juice mixed with butter applied to burns and scalds for a soothing and cooling effect. Leaves and stems have been used as anticancer for melanoma, leukemia, and oral cancer.
Roots and leaves used for the removal of after birth, stomach pains, and increase milk production.
Used orally for anal prolapse and hernia.
In Nigeria, used for hypertension. (37) Also used for fertility enhancement in women.
In Nepal, leaf juice is used to treat dysentery, catarrh, and applied externally to boils.
In Thai traditional medicine, the mucilage is used as application for bruises, ringworm, and laboring. Stem and leaves used as mild laxative, diuretic and antipyretic.
In Cameroon used for malaria. (37) Herbal healers use plant extracts to enhance libido and as remedy for infertility.
In Antilles leaves considered good maturative as cataplasm.
In Thai traditional medicine, mucilage is used as topical medicine for skin irritation, bruises, ringworm, and laboring. (37)
Others
Cosmetic: Fruit used by women as rouge for cheeks and lips; also as a dye.
Dye: With the anthocyanin content, it makes for a natural food colorant. Fruit provides a dark violet color as food colorant.
Veterinary: Ground leaves rubbed on the human hand to introduce the preparation into the animal vagina every morning for the treatment of sterility.
Pharmaceuticals: Plant mucilage has been proposed for applications in medicine and cosmetics. The mucilage has also been proposed as thickener, water-retention agent, gelling agent, suspending agent and film former.



