Rediscovering the therapeutic potential of Amaranthus species: A review

Abstract
Extracts of Amaranthus have been used to treat several ailments since ancient times. However, Amaranthus spp. has seen a resurgence of interest in recent decades. Literature summarization of in vitro and in vivo studies established that Amaranthus spp. has several protective and curative properties attributed majorly to strong antioxidant activity. This comprehensive review critically analyzes folklore claims of Amaranthus with scientific evidences, delineating its phytochemical based nutra-pharmaceutical properties and emphasizes clinical utility of the plant in various chronic diseases, also defining gap areas for future clinical research. Data on 13 edible Amaranthus spp. was acquired via an electronic search including regional scientific journals, theses, books and government reports. These results provide an in-depth analysis of biological effects of major bioactive ingredients present in crude extracts of specific bioparts. However, bioavailability and underlying mechanism of action of constituents isolated from Amaranthus spp. have not been worked out, thus necessitating focused research in this arena.
Recent decades have witnessed a resurgence of interest in Amaranthus spp. as nutraceutical and natural protector against chronic ailments. A native of tropical America, Amaranthus (meaning immortal in Greek) was a staple crop in the Aztec, Mayan, Incan civilizations. Currently it is widely cultivated and consumed throughout India, Nepal, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Phillipines; whole of Central America, Mexico; Southern and Eastern Africa.
Genus Amaranthus belongs to order Caryophyllales, family Amaranthaceae, sub-family Amaranthoideae. It includes branched annual herbs with about 70 different species, 17 of which are edible. National Botanical Research Institute of India (NBRI) has built up perhaps, one of the best qualitative collections of Amaranth ‘germplasm’ in the world, comprising nearly 400 accessions, referable to 20 species, of which nearly half belong to the grain type [1].
Amaranthus extracts have been used in ancient Indian, Nepalese, Chinese and Thai medicine to treat several conditions including urinary infections, gynecological conditions, diarrhea, pain, respiratory disorders, diabetes and also as diuretic [2], [3], [4]. In India, root extract of A. spinosus is given as a vermicide among the Santhali and Paharia tribes of eastern Bihar, while an aqueous decoction of the plant is used for chronic diarrhea in southern Orissa [5]. Some tribes apply A. spinosus to induce abortion. The juice of A. spinosus is used by tribals of Kerala to prevent swelling around stomach while leaves are boiled without salt and consumed for 2–3 days to cure jaundice [6]. However, anti-cancerous, anti-viral, hepatoprotective, neuroprotecive, cardioprotective and antidiabetic properties, of Amaranthus with relevance to current global health scenario are currently in the limelight.
Natural crude extracts from plants have been used in traditional medicine to treat various ailments, Amaranthus spp. is one of them; though its complete therapeutic uses are still unexplored. Scientific interest in Amaranthus and its health promoting benefits has increased significantly in the recent past with various reviews presenting nutraceutical properties of Amaranth [7]; its composition, antioxidant properties, applications, and processing [8]. The present review provides a comprehensive updated account of scientific data of the current decade on phytochemical constituents and in vivo/in vitro pharmacological activities (Fig. 1) of different bioparts of 13 Amaranthus spp. with special emphasis on the need for clinical studies, highlighting the gaps in research areas.
Active components of Amaranthus spp
Extracts of all plant parts of Amaranthus seem to have medicinal benefits; hence the focus of recent studies has been to identify therapeutic constituents of Amaranthus from different bioparts. High antioxidant activity of most Amaranthus spp., along with anti-inflammatory property, has increased interest in investigating its nutraceutical and clinical potential as functional food. Phytochemical analysis of aerial parts of various Amaranthus spp. has established presence of active constituents like alkaloids, flavonoids, glycosides, phenolic acids, steroids, saponins, amino acids, vitamins, minerals, terpenoids, lipids, betaine, catechuic tannins and carotenoids [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. Also documented are amaranthoside, a lignan glycoside; amaricin, a coumaroyl adenosine [14], betalains such as betacyanins (amaranthine, isoamaranthin), betaxanthin; hydroxycinnamates, quercitin and kaempferol glycosides as flavonoids and phenolic acids [15]. Amaranth extracts isolated sequentially by acetone and methanol/water from defatted plant leaves, flowers, stem and seeds yield rutin, nicotiflorin, isoquercitrin, 4-hydroxybenzoic and p-coumaric acids as major components [16].
In species specific studies, evaluation of bioactive substances and phenolic contents of A. tricolor and A. hypochondriacus leaves revealed high content of betacyanins and betaxanthins while isoquercetin and rutin were the most abundant flavonoids; salicylic, syringic, gallic, vanilic, ferulic, p-coumaric, ellagic and sinapic acid were the most common phenolic acid [17]. In addition to the known betalains, red-violet amaranthin, a novel betaxanthin, methyl derivatives of arginine betaxanthin and betalamic acid were detected in A. tricolor leaves [18]. Rutin and quercitin content was determined in individual plant parts of five Amaranthus spp. Only Amaranthus leaves sampled at maturity stage contained quercetin or quercetin derivatives. A. hybrid and A. cruentus were the best source of rutin [19]; while amount of rutin and quercetin in methanolic leaf extract of A. viridis was found to be 58.52 and 9.12% w/v respectively [20]. In an exclusive study, Jhade et al. [21] reported alkaloids, glycosides, terpenes, and sugars as the major phytochemicals in roots of A. spinosus.
The role of active components bioflavonoids, rutin and quercetinin mitigating radiation induced oxidative stress has been investigated by Patil et al. [22], but lack of similar studies on rutin and quercetin sourced from Amaranthus delineates the need for clinical research in this area. These compounds possess multifarious properties and are thought to be the main compounds responsible for Amaranthus spp. beneficial health effects. In addition, synergistic action of these components and their bio-absorption is not well worked out.
Nutraceutical/supplementary food
A study by Dlamini et al. concluded that A. cruentus is potentially a good dietary source of the pro-vitamin A carotenoid (β-carotene). Carotenoid content was highest in leaves, followed by seeds, stem and roots. The major carotenoid identified in the leaves was canthaxanthin (antitumor agent), followed by β-carotene and lutein (retardant for age related eye diseases). The level of β-carotene (28.5 mg/100 g) in A. cruentus was seven times higher than in tomatoes and thus may help to treat anaemia in African countries [23].
In a comparative study, calcium content in dry leaves of A. spinosus was found to have higher value (4500 mg/100 g dry weight) followed by A. tricolor, A. viridis and A. blitum, while iron content was maximum in A. viridis (15 mg) followed by A. spinosus, A. tricolor and A. blitum. Thus Amaranthus spp. can be used as a source of biogenic calcium and in antacid preparations [24].
Amaranth grain, also called Rama’s grain (Rajgira) in India, is highly nutritious and a good source of anthocyanins and polyphenolics [25].The grain has high protein content, well balanced amino acid profile with 8 essential amino acids and very high levels of lysine which is unique compared to other grains. Moreover, it is rich in starch, oil, fiber, vitamins (A, K, B6, C, E and B) and minerals such as calcium, iron, etc. [26]. It doesn't contain gluten and its high content of quality protein and unsaturated fatty acids is one of its advantages as food supplement. Amaranthus seeds are also carrier of valuable fiber and an alternative natural source of squalene (a triterpene); which is a superior antioxidant and known for its wide biological efficacy; against cancer [27] hyper-cholesterolemia [28]; and as cardioprotectant [29]. A. caudatus and A. paniculatus seeds are documented to possess antioxidant potential [30]. Silva and co-workers [31] reported the presence of a lunasin-like peptide (11.1 µg/g of total extracted protein) in four genotypes of mature amaranth seeds showing a match for more than 60% with soybean lunasin peptide sequence which is known to possess anti-cancerous properties.
The studies mentioned above conclusively indicate that Amaranthus spp. contains appreciable amount of nutrients and can be included in diet to supplement daily nutritional requirements to combat diseases, hence serving as a nutraceutical for fortification of food.
Antioxidant potential of Amaranthus spp
Antioxidants, molecules that reduce effect of free radicals; important for protection against cancer and degenerative disorders; are in abundance in Amaranthus spp. (Table 1). Antioxidant potential has been attributed to the presence of appreciable levels of phenolics and flavonoids. Leaves and flowers of Amaranthus as well as their extracts were shown to possess highest antioxidant activities compared to other parts; rutin being the major radical-scavenger [16]. Total antioxidant activity assay of dry leaf powder of A. tricolor revealed 1 g equivalent to 0.035 g/ml of ascorbic acid [12]. Evaluation of pure and aqueous-methanolic leaf and seed extracts from A. viridis [32]; ethyl acetate leaf extracts of A. spinosus [33], revealed that they possess good radical scavenging activity with IC50 value of 14.25–83.43 µg/ml and 53.68 µg/ml respectively, confirming their superior antioxidant activity. A study based on hydroacetonic, methanolic and aqueous extracts prepared from aerial parts of A. cruentus and A. hybridus; conducted by Nana et al. [9] described these extracts as having antioxidant and xanthine oxidase inhibitory activities in vitro.

