Amaranthus viridis 

Green amaranth is an annual or short-lived perennial herbaceous plant. It is anchored in the ground by one or more strong ramified pivots. Its port is erect or more or less ascending, reaching up to 1 m in height.
The rather slender stem is cylindrical, ridged, glabrous to slightly pubescent in its upper part with multicellular hairs, of green and often reddish color at its base.
The alternate, simple leaves are borne on petioles up to 10 cm long. The blade is deltoid-oval to rhomboid-oblong, with a short cuneiform base, notched apex with a small mucro, glabrous upper and lower surface. The margin is entire, sometimes sinuate. The lateral veins, 7 to 8 slightly arched are clearly visible.
Inflorescences consisting of agglomerated cymes arranged in slender, axillary or mostly terminal spikes, frequently paniculate, up to 12 cm long, or in the lower part of the stem often arranged in dense axillary clusters around 7 mm in diameter.
The flowers are unisexual, subsessile, green. Male and female flowers mixed. The female flowers are more numerous: bracts and bracteoles lanceolate-ovate, around 1 mm long, whitish membranous, 3 oblong to obovate tepals, 1 to 1.5 mm long, ovary superior. The male flowers have 3 stamens with a whitish filament and yellow cross-shaped anthers.
The fruit is an indehiscent, subglobose capsule, about 1.5 mm in diameter, usually strongly wrinkled, not exceeding or slightly exceeding the perianth, terminated by a very short trifid stigma, containing a seed.
The shiny black seed is subglobose, slightly compressed, smooth, about 1 mm in diameter.
Multiplication of Amaranthus viridis.
Amaranthus viridis reproduces solely by seed, which is dispersed by water and wind. It produces a large number of seeds which have a long viability.
Use Amaranthus viridis.
The leaves and young plants of Amaranthus viridis, before they flower, are sometimes eaten as a cooked vegetable. The leaves contain tannins, reducing sugars and resins.
The species is also used as fodder for livestock and as green manure.
The ashes of the plant are rich in soda and are sometimes used to make soap.
Medicinal use Amaranthus viridis.
The leaves are diuretic and purgative.
