Present Biological Status of Potential Medicinal Plant of Amaranthus viridis: A Comprehensive Review

Amaranthus  viridis  L.  (Family  Amaranthaceae)  is distributed in  the  warmer parts  of  the world  .In  addition the whole  plant  possesses  analgesic  and  anti-pyretic  properties and is used for the treatment of pain and fever respectively in traditional  systems  of medicine  [1]. A.  viridis  is  possibly of Asian origin but now a cosmopolitan weed in the tropical and subtropical  regions  of the  world, also  ubiquitous faraway  to temperate  regions  (e.g. in  Europe,  North  America, Asia  and Australia).  In  equatorial  Africa  it  is  also  a  profound  and common  weed.  It is  occasionally cultivated  (e.g. in  Nigeria, Gabon  and  DR  Congo)  [2].  A.  viridis  Linn.  Is  Erect  or ascending annual or short-lived perennial herb up to 1 m tall; glabrous,  angular,  bear  branches,  stem  slender  to  sparsely pubescent in upper part with multicellular hairs. It is consists of  alternate  leaves  with  petiole  which  can  be  up  to  10  cm long; blade deltoid-ovate to rhomboid-oblong, 2–8 cm × 1.5–6 cm, margin sometimes sinuate , apex emarginate with small
mucro, ,  base  shortly cuneate,  glabrous to  pubescent.  It also consists  of  axillary  or  mostly  terminal  spikes,  frequently paniculated,  agglomerated  cymes  arranged  in slender,  up  to 12 cm long, in the lower part of the stem often in proliferated axillary  clusters  7  mm  in  diameter.  Flowers  are  subsessile, green  in  colour, unisexual,  bracts  and  bracteoles lanceolate-ovate,  male  and  female  intermixed  but  female  ones  more numerous in 1 mm long, oblong to obovate in 1–1.5 mm long, whitish-membranous;  tepals  male  flowers  with  3  stamens; female  flowers  with superior,  midrib  often thickened  above, bent along the fruit. Fruit of a subglobose capsule, c. 1.5 mm in  diameter,  not  or  slightly  exceeding  the  perianth,  usually strongly  wrinkled,  indehiscent,1  seeded  Seed  sub globose  ,slightly  compressed,  c.1mm  in  diameter,  glossy black,  margin  acute,  verrucose  or  with  inconspicuous structure.  Epigeal  germination  is  seen  in  seedlings, cotyledons  lanceolate,  c.12  mm  ×  2.5  mm  [2].  Leaves 
Plants  are  the  major  sources of  drugs  or  molecule  which demonstrate  mild  to  significant  pharmacological  activity against  tremendous  organisms  and  diseases.  Phyto-constituents and pharmacological  activity demonstrate in the table-1 and table-2. A. viridis  L  (Amaranthaceae)  is  commonly used  the  India and  Nepal  to  lessen  labor  pains  and  as  an  antipyretic (Kirithikar and Basu, 1986; Mark Turin, 2003). The Negritos of the Philippines apply the bruised leaves directly to eczema, psoriasis and  rashes (Eduardo and Quisumbing, 1951). Other traditional  uses  are  as  an  anti-inflammatory  agent  of  the urinary  tract,  in  venereal  diseases,  as a  vermifuge, diuretic, antirheumatic,  antiulcer,  analgesic,  antiemetic;  laxative,  for improving  appetite,  as  an  antileprotic,  for  the  treatment  of respiratory  problems,  eye  treatment  and  for  asthma (Anonymous,  1988;  Agra  et  al., 2007;  2008;  Kirithikar  and Basu,  1986;  Hassan  Sher  and  Khan,  2006;  Quershi  et  al., 2008; Muhammad  Arshad,  2000; Muhammad  Ejaz  Ul Islam Dar,  2003;  Muhammad  and  Amusa,  2005)  A  novel antiproliferative  and  antifungal  lactin  and  a  ribosome inactivating protein, β-carotene,  were isolated from A. viridis (Kaur et al., 2006; Kwon et al., 1997; Sena et al., 1998) and it also possesses antiviral activity (Obi et al., 2006). The whole of  the  A. viridis  plant  is  used for  the  treatment of  pain  and fever  in  traditional  medicine.  However,  there  is insufficient scientific  proof  regarding  the  analgesic  and  antipyretic activity  of  A.  viridis,  so  our  aim  is  to  provide  scientific validation for traditional uses 
Plants  are  used as  antipyretic  and  anti-nociceptive by  the following  ways  of  methanolic  extract  of  whole  plant  of  A. viridis L (MEAV),  was  screened  for  anti-nociceptive  activity using acetic acid induced hot plate test, writhing test  and tail immersion test  in mice. A screening exercise was carried out to  determine  the  antipyretic  potential  of  the  extract  using yeast  induced  pyrexia  method  in  rats.  The  extract  was
administered  to  both laboratory animals  at  the  doses  of  200 and  400  mg/kg  body  weight,  respectively.  The  statistical analysis  demonstrate  that  MEAV  had  significant  (p<0.01) dose  dependent  antinociceptive  and antipyretic  properties  at 200  and  400  mg/kg.  Therefore,  current  study  discloses  the antinociceptive  and  antipyretic  activities  of  methanolic extract of A. 
The present study was conducted to evaluate the phenolics, antimicrobial  and  antioxidant  properties  of  leaf  and  seed extracts from an edible herb namely A.  viridis  L. The extract yields  of  active  components,  produced  using  aqueous  and pure methanol,  from the seeds and leaves  ranged  from 2.4 to 3.7%  and  5.4  to  6.0%,  respectively.  The  extracts  posses significant  levels  of  total  phenolic  contents  (1.03  to  3.64 GAE, g/100  g) and total flavonoid contents  (18.4  – 5.42 QE, g/100  g)  and  also  exhibited  good  1,  1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl  (DPPH)  radical  scavenging  activity  as revealed  by  IC50  (14.25  -  83.43  µg/ml).  Besides,  the  tested extracts  showed  considerable  antimicrobial  activity  against selected bacterial and fungal strains with minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) ranging from 179-645 µg/ml. Amongst the plant parts tested and the  seed extracts exhibited superior antioxidant  and  antimicrobial  activity.  In  conclusion,  A. viridis leaf and seed can be explored as a potential source for isolation  of  antioxidant  and  antimicrobial agents  for  uses  in functional food and pharmaceuticals.
5. Hepatoprotective Activity of A. viridis Heaptoprotective  activity  of  methanolic  extract  of  whole plant  of  A.  viridis  Linn  (MeAv)  in  paracetamol  (PCM) induced  hepatotoxicity.  MeAv  was  screened  for hepatoprotective  activity  in  PCM  (3  g/kg)  induced hepatotoxicity  in  Wistar  rats  for  15 days  at  dose of  200 and 400  mg/kg  by  measuring  liver  marker enzymes  (serum glutamate  pyruvate  transaminase  and  serum  glutamate oxaloacetate  transaminase),  bilirubin  (total  bilirubin  and direct bilirubin) and albumin (ALB), total protein (TP) levels and  histopathological  studies.  Antioxidant  properties  were investigated by measuring malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced glutathione  (GSH),  catalase  (CAT)  and  total  thiols  (TT)  in liver  homegenate  of  treated  animals.  MeAv  significantly (P<0.001)  decreases  the  elevated  liver  marker  enzymes (serum  glutamate  pyruvate  transaminase  and  serum glutamate  oxaloacetate  transaminase),  bilirubin  (total bilirubin  and  direct  bilirubin)  and  restores  albumin  (ALB), total  protein  (TP)  levels.  A  histopathological  study  also showed liver protective  property of MeAv. In  animal  model, the  antioxidant  studies,  the  MeAv  has  notably  retained  the malondialdehyde  (MDA),  reduced  glutathione  (GSH), catalase (CAT) and total thiols. In conclusion, administration of MeAv for 15 days showed  liver protective activity against
paracetamol  induced  liver  damage  and  the  potential antioxidant  property  of  MeAv  thought  to be  the mechanism behind its hepatoprotective activity [11]. 6. Anti-inflammatory Effects of A. viridis The  present  study was carried  out to  investigate the  anti-inflammatory  property  of  petroleum  ether,  alcoholic  and aqueous extracts of A.  viridis Linn leaves using experimental animal  models  (Male  albino  rats, weighing  150-200g).  The Anti-inflammatory  activity  of  the  various  extracts  was studied  based  on  their effects  on  carrageen  an-induced paw oedema  and  cotton  pellet  glaucoma  in  rats.  The  extracts  in dose levels of 50,100 and 200 mg/kg orally applied  for  anti-inflammatory  studies.  The  aqueous  and  ethanol  extracts  of leaves of trianthema portulacastrum significant (P<0.05) anti-inflammatory activities in a dose-dependent manner to that of standard drug indomethacin, where as petroleum ether extract exhibit  minimum  inhibitory  effect  in  carageenan  induced hind paw oedema and cotton pellet granuloma in rats. All the doses  were applied  relative to  the  control group.  The  crude leaf  extracts  demonstrate  of  A.  viridis  possess  potent  anti-inflammatory  by supporting  the folkloric  usage of  the  plant to treat various inflammatory conditions [13]. 7. Antihelmintic Activity of A. viridis According  to  the  WHO,  only  a  few  drugs  are  used  in treatment of helminthes in humans. Anthelmintics from plant resources  play  a  key  role  in  the  treatment  of  these  parasite infections. In  view of this,  attempts have been made to study the anthelmintic  activity of  traditional  medicinal plants. The three plants presented in this study are Amaranthus viridis L., Amaranthus  spinosus  and  Amaranthus  caudatus.  They belong  to  the  Amaranthaceae  family  and  are  traditionally used  as  vermicides.  Our  aim  was  to  investigate  the anthelmintic  activity  of  the  three  plants  using  earthworms (Pheretima  posthuma).  Methanol  extracts  of the  three  plants at  different  concentrations  (10,  20, 40,  60,  80,  100  mg/ml) showed  dose-dependent  vermicidal  activities.  At concentrations  of  80  and 100  mg/ml  all three  plant  extracts caused  paralysis  (8.18,  5,  12.16,  5.75,  10.2,  7.8  min)  and death  (14.65, 9.12,  18.6,  8.5,  18.6,  12.7  min),  respectively. Piperazine  was  applied  as  a  reference  standard  at  a concentration  of  10  mg/ml.  Our  study  found  that  the  three plants possess potent anthelmintic activity when compared to Piperazine [14]. 8. Antifungal Activity of A. viridis The  plants  have  investigated  in  the  search  for  new substances  against  microorganisms  resistant  to  current pesticides and antibiotics. They are evaluate the existence  of antiphytopathogenic  properties  of  organic  extracts  from  the leaves of amaranth (A.  viridis  L.),  Amaranthaceae,  popularly known  as  caruru.  The  hexanic  ,  dichloromethanic  ,  ethylic acetate  and  ethanolic  extracts  were  obtained,  respectively
with  yields  of  2.2, 2.4,  3.2  and 3.6%  (m/m). These  extracts were  used  to  determine  the  Minimum  Inhibitory Concentration  (MIC),  through  dilution  technique  using  96 well microplate.  After  investigating the  CIM  in wells  where no  fungal  growth  was  detected,  the  Minimum  Fungicidal Concentration  (MFC)  was  determined  on  plates  containing dextrose Sabouraud agar. The experimental  crude  extracts  of Amaranthus  indicate  activity  against  the  fungi Colletotrichum  musae  (Berk.  and  Curt.)  Arx,  causing anthracnose  of  banana  and  against  Fusarium  solani  f.  sp. piperis  responsible  for  fusariosis  in  black  pepper.  In comparison  to  Colletotrichum  musae  extracts  obtained  with ethyl  acetate,  dichloromethane  and  ethanol,  the  MIC  differ from  15.6-250.0  µg  mL-1.  The ethylic  acetate,  hexanic  and ethanolic  extracts  showed  activity  against  Fusarium  solani with MIC limited from 31.2-250.0  µg  mL-1. In this research, it  was  showed  the  presence  of  antifungal  constituents  in extracts of  A.  viridis L., revealing  its potential antimicrobial effect against these two phytopathogenic strains tested [15]. 9. Antihyperglycemic and Hypolipidemic Activity of A. viridis To  investigate  the  hypolipidemic  and  antihyperglycemic effects of  methanolic extract of leaves of  A. viridis  (MEAV) in  normal  and  Streptozotocin  (STZ)  induced  diabetic  rats. The activities  of  methanol extract of leaves of A. viridis was evaluated  by  using normal  and STZ  induced  diabetic rats  at dose of 200  mg/kg and  400 mg/kg by  mouth  per day  for  21 days. Body weight and blood  glucose  levels  were  monitored at  specific  intervals,  and  different  biochemical  parameters such  as  serum  triglyceride,  serum  cholesterol  high  density lipoprotein,  and  low density lipoprotein  were  assessed. Very low  density  lipoprotein,  were  also  evaluated  in  the experimental animals. Histology of pancreas  was performed. The statistical data demonstrated a significant increase in  the body  weight,  decrease  in  the  serum  triglycerides,  total cholesterol  and  blood  glucose  after  treatment  with  MEAV. High  density  lipoprotein  (HDL)  cholesterol  level  was significantly  increased  when  treated  with  extract.  In histological study, focal necrosis was found in the diabetic rat pancreas; however, was  less  profound in  treated groups. The MEAV  has  advantageous  impact  in  reducing  the  elevated blood  glucose  level  and  body  weight  changes,  and in  STZ induced rats, the lipid profile is improved. According  to  the  International  Diabetes  federation (IDF), at  present  Type-2  diabetes  affects  246  million  people worldwide and is expected to increase to 380 million by 2025. Metabolic syndrome is a amalgamation  of  various  disorders, including reduced  glucose tolerance, abdominal obesity, high cholesterol  and  high blood  pressure which  enhance  the  risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Recent  studies  have  demonstrated  a variety  of  important literature  indicates  that  there  is  no  scientific  evidence  to support  the  antihyperglycemic  and  hypolipidemic  effects  of A.  viridis.  The  present  study  investigates  the  action  of 
American Journal of Clinical and Experimental Medicine 2015; 3(5-1): 12-17   15  methanolic  extract  of  A.viridis  (MEVA)  in  the  different models of  rats  to ascertain the  scientific basis  for  the  use of this  plant  in  the  treatment  of  diabetes  and  hyperlipidemia [16]. 10. Antioxidant, Antihyperlipidemic and Antidiabetic Activities of A. viridis The  antioxidant,  antihyperlipidemic  and  antidiabetic activities  of  methanolic  extract  of  whole  plant  of  A.  viridis (MEAV)  in  alloxan  (ALX)  induced  diabetic  rats.  Diabetes was diagnosed  after 5 days of single intraperitoneal injection of ALX  (140  mg/kg) in albino  Wister rats.  MEAV (200 and 400  mg/kg)  and  glibenclamide  (10  mg/kg,  p.o.)  orally ingested  everyday  for  15  days,  blood  was  withdrawn  for glucose  level  determination  on  0,  1,  10  and  15  days respectively.  In  the  day  15,  rats  were  fasted  overnight, sacrificed  and  blood  was  collected for  the determination  of high  density  lipoproteins  cholesterol  (HDL-C),  low  density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), very low density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C), total cholesterol (TC), total glycerides (TG) and total  proteins  (TP). For in vivo antioxidant activity of  MEAV,  the  assay  of  lipid  peroxidation  and  liver  tissues were  homogenized  was  measured  as  glutathione  (GSH), Malondialdehyde (MDA), catalase (CAT) and total thiols (TT) were  performed  in,  ALX,  MEAV  treated  and  control  rats. MEAV  at  doses  of  200  and  400  mg/kg  showed  significant reduction  is  lipid  profiles  and  blood  glucose  including significant improvement  in TT, CAT,  GSH,  and MDA when compared  to  diabetic  control  group.  Ex  vivo  α-amylase inhibition  activity  of  MEAV  was  investigated.  We  can conclude that  MEAV possess antioxidant, antihyperlipidemic and antidiabetic activities . 