Try Jasmine Tea for a Whole New World of Health Benefits

Jasmine tea is basically good ol’ green tea wearing perfume. The result is an aromatic experience and delicate floral flavor with green tea’s benefits.

Here’s why drinking this bouquet in a cup might be good for your health.

What are the benefits of jasmine tea?

Besides being delicious, there’s some evidence jasmine tea has health benefits that can:
- fight inflammation
- improve heart health
- upgrade your oral health
- help your skin
- boost brain power
- may lower risk of Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s
- increase energy
- may help heal wounds
- help manage type 2 diabetes
- may help cancer prevention
- improve metabolism and aid weight loss

What is it? The scoop on jasmine tea

To make jasmine tea, green tea leaves are usually infused with fresh blossoms from the common jasmine or sampaguita plant. The flowers are replaced a number of times until the tea gets its signature scent. Then the flowers are removed and the scented green tea leaves are dried and prepared for your cup.

Most of jasmine tea’s magic is in its green tea base. And as one of the most popular beverages on the planet, green tea has been studied a lot for its health benefits. Here are the main benefits backed by research.
11 benefits of drinking jasmine tea

1. Fight inflammation

Polyphenols called catechins are the antioxidant hero of jasmine tea. Antioxidants help protect your cells from damage and may prevent or slow the progress of disease.

A 2017 study on human cells found the catechins in green tea may have an anti-inflammatory effect on folks with rheumatoid arthritis. But, researchers noted we need more studies on green tea’s potential drug interactions with green tea, how much green tea helps inflammation, and if it’s more beneficial to drink green tea or take green tea extract capsules for anti-inflammatory benefits.

The same powerful catechin called epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) had an anti-inflammatory effect linked to a reduced risk of heart disease.


2. Improve heart health

Speaking of you ticker, jasmine tea’s polyphenols are also linked to a healthier heart.

In a 2019 study of 30 women, participants spent 10 weeks practicing high intensity interval training (HIIT), taking green tea tablets, or both. Researchers found that triglycerides and LDL cholesterol (the “bad” one) improved in all groups — especially in those taking tablets and doing HIIT workouts. LDL cholesterol is what can clog your arteries and lead to heart attacks and stroke.

Research from 2016 also found folks who sipped 1 to 3 cups of green tea every day had a 19 percent lower risk of heart attack and a 36 percent reduced risk of stroke.


3. Upgrade your oral health

Jasmine tea may help your smile, too.

Research shows the anti-inflammatory ECGC compounds (aka catechins) in green tea help prevent cavity-causing bacteria buildup, and green tea’s antimicrobial effect can target bad breath.

A 2021 study of 60 children also found that green tea extract mouthwash helped fight plaque.


4. Improve skin health

Jasmine tea’s all-powerful ECGC content may also give you flawless skin. A 2016 review found the EGCG in green tea may help improve acne and oily skin. A 2021 review also found using green tea extract topically was more effective at treating acne than taking the extract orally.

A 2019 review looking at animal studies noted green tea’s antioxidants may reduce sun damage and green tea may help prevent the breakdown of collagen to help combat wrinkles. But we need more human trials to confirm this is legit and the review looked at studies using topical and oral applications of green tea.


5. Boost brain function

A 2017 review found green tea may help improve memory, attention, and overall brain function. But researchers couldn’t pinpoint exactly what in green tea was to thank for these benefits when both caffeine and L-theanine are known to help the brain.

Other research has also noted Jasmine tea’s L-theanine and caffeine content may boost your brain power.


6. May lower Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease risk

Jasmine tea may also help your noggin steer clear from diseases that affect your brain.

Research on preventing Parkinson’s disease shows the anti-inflammatory compound EGCG in green tea may improve memory and increase learning ability. Plus, there’s evidence that drinking 2 or more cups of green tea a day may lower your risk of Parkinson’s disease.

A 2016 meta analysis also found drinking green tea daily is linked to cognitive decline in Chinese elderly folks, but there’s no way to prove drinking green tea helps prevent Alzheimer’s disease.

So while there’s some evidence that suggests green tea may help cognitive decline and neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, we just don’t have enough evidence to prove it works.


7. Increase your energy

If you need an energy boost, jasmine tea’s caffeine content can help.

Caffeine enhances processing speed and improves long- and short-term memory. But studies have shown mixed results regarding caffeine’s effects on mood and cognitive function.


8. May help heal wounds

Watch out Neosporin, jasmine tea may help fight pesky bacteria.

According to 2019 research, topical EGCG via green tea can also combat bacterial overgrowth to help wounds heal. But we need more data to know if pouring jasmine tea on boo-boos does any good.


9. May help prevent type 2 diabetes

Drinking green tea daily is associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes and death in people with diabetes.

Green tea extract may also help your body use insulin better and lower your blood sugar levels. But this is based on folks who already have a metabolic syndrome or are obese. We could definitely use more research to prove the link.


10. May help cancer prevention

Research has noted polyphenols like ECG and EGCG in green tea may fight cancer and regulate the growth of tumors. But, more research is needed since results of studies so far have been inconsistent.

A 2020 review found green tea’s anticancer effects may work specifically against lung cancer, breast cancer, esophageal cancer, stomach cancer, liver cancer, and prostate cancer. However, most of this research is via test tube and animal studies so we need more human studies.

Researchers also caution that your cup of tea will not replace chemotherapy as a cancer treatment.


11. Aid weight loss and improve metabolism

Jasmine tea may help you on your weight loss journey thanks to its effects on your metabolism.

A 2021 meta-analysis of 15 studies with a total of 499 participants found green tea catechins seem to slightly increase fat metabolism. But the study that showed folks burn more calories also completed resistance exercises.

So while results like this seem promising, there’s mixed evidence that shows it might be the caffeine, not green tea’s antioxidants that help boost your metabolism.

Does jasmine tea have any side effects?

Drinking jasmine tea in moderate amounts is generally considered safe. But, some folks may be sensitive to the tea’s caffeine content.

The caffeine in jasmine tea may increase anxiety or cause other mild side effects like:
- restlessness
- insomnia
- increased urination
- irritability
- upset stomach
- elevated heart rate

The catechins in jasmine tea may also affect how your body absorbs iron. This can increase your risk of iron deficiency anemia if you drink too much jasmine tea (and get a large dose of catechins). But, this usually only applies to folks who drink an excessive amount of green tea or are more prone to an iron deficiency due to pregnancy or dietary restrictions.


Pour it up: How to drink Jasmine tea

You can find jasmine tea practically anywhere you can buy tea. You can find it as loose leaf and bagged teas, but it’s commonly found in little balls of tea leaves called pearls. Here’s how to brew a cup:
- Place your tea leaves or pearls in a tea pot or large mug.
- Add hot water, ideally between 160–180°F (71–82°C). Boiling water is a no-no because it can wreck the tea’s flavor.
- Steep your tea for 3–5 minutes.
- Strain the leaves or pearls out of your tea.
- Add your fave sweetener if you’d like.

The takeaway
Think of jasmine tea as green tea’s fancy sister. She smells great and has all the same health benefits. Green tea is known for its antioxidants that can help everything from your brain and heart to your smile and skin.
Drinking jasmine tea is usually safe as long as you’re not sensitive to caffeine or have an iron deficiency. 