Everything You Need to Know About Jasmine Essential Oil


Jasmine oil  

Jasmine oil is an essential oil derived from the white flowers of the common jasmine plant, also known as Jasminun officinale. The flower is believed to originate from Iran, but can now also be found in tropical climates.

For centuries, jasmine has been popular for its sweet, romantic fragrance and has been used in some of the world’s best-known perfumes, including Chanel No. 5. It’s also a common ingredient in alcohol, sweets, and desserts.

Jasmine oil and components of synthetic blends of jasmine essential oil have properties that offer a number of health benefits. Though it’s a popular home remedy used to treat everything from depression to infections, it’s best known as an aphrodisiac.

Jasmine oil benefits and uses  

Jasmine oil is a popular home remedy believed to have a number of health benefits. While not all of the benefits have been scientifically proven, many have.

Antidepressant

There is evidence that aromatherapy can effectively reduce depressive symptoms. A study that looked at jasmine essential oil found that when compared to a placebo, jasmine oil increased behavioral arousal.

This included significant increases in blood oxygen saturation, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The participants in the jasmine oil group also reported feeling more alert. The researchers concluded that the stimulating and activating effect of jasmine oil could be useful for relieving depression and improving mood.

Jasmine oil used in aromatherapy massage was found to be particularly effective.

Another study published in the Journal of Health Research examined the effects of jasmine oil inhalation on the central nervous system and mood. When inhaled, jasmine oil affected brain activity and mood states and the participants reported feeling more positive, energetic, and romantic.

You can reap the mental benefits of jasmine oil aromatherapy by using it in massage oil or in a diffuser, or by inhaling it directly from the bottle.

Antiseptic

Jasmine oil made from various species of the plant has been found to have antibacterial properties. Its antiseptic effects have been extensively studied and found to fight various bacteria.

One study found that natural jasmine oil derived from the Jasminum sambac plant, as well as its synthetic blends, showed antibacterial activity against one strain of E. coli.

In another study, the oil showed antimicrobial activity against several oral microorganisms, including E. coli, L. casei, and S. mutans. It also worked as an antimicrobial agent against all strains of candida, the bacteria that causes oral thrush.

Jasmine oil may be effective in treating and preventing infections when diluted and applied to the skin or used as a rinse for oral infections, such as oral thrush.

Aphrodisiac

Jasmine’s romantic scent has long been believed to have an aphrodisiac effect. It’s been worn as a fragrance, and in parts of India, jasmine flowers are often included as décor at weddings in the newlyweds’ bedroom to set the mood for romance.

There is little scientific evidence to back its effects as an aphrodisiac. We do know that inhaling jasmine or using it in aromatherapy massage improves mood and has been reported to increase romantic and positive feelings, as well as energy levels.

These things could, in theory, prime someone for romance and sex. Also, its stimulant effect on brain waves may make a person more alert to sexual cues, possibly increasing blood flow to the penis, according to a small study that looked at the association between odors and sexual response.

If you’re hoping to spice things up in the bedroom with jasmine oil, try dabbing some of the oil on your neck. Your body heat will enhance the scent. You can also add a few drops on bedding, to a warm bath, or to a diffuser in the bedroom.

Antispasmodic

Jasmine is used as a home remedy to treat spasms in various parts of the body, from cramp-producing stomach spasms to spasmodic cough.

There’s very limited scientific evidence on jasmine oil’s ability to reduce spasms. One study did find it effective in reducing labor pain when diluted and used for massage. Even though the evidence is limited, using jasmine oil to massage muscles certainly won’t hurt and may provide some relief from spasms.

Cicatrizant

Jasmine oil may have a cicatrizing effect and promote wound healing through the formation of scar tissue. We know that jasmine oil has antiseptic properties that are beneficial in treating skin infections.

According to research, jasmine oil also has anti-inflammatory properties and can be useful in general skin care and the treatment of psoriasis.

A recent animal study found jasmine extract was able to speed up healing of chronic wounds, such as diabetic ulcers. It significantly enhanced wound contraction and granulation tissue formation, and increased new blood vessel formation.

Applying diluted jasmine oil to minor wounds, such as small scratches and cuts, may help them heal faster.

Decreases menopause symptoms

Essential oils for menopause relief are not new. They’ve been used for years to treat symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and depression.

Though the evidence on the effect of jasmine on menopause symptoms is very limited, it has been shown effective in improving mood and reducing depression.

A small study found that aromatherapy massage once a week for eight weeks greatly reduced menopause symptoms. The massages were performed using a combination of essential oils of jasmine, lavender, rose, and rose geranium in a carrier oil.

If you’re looking for natural ways to reduce symptoms of menopause, regular aromatherapy massages using the same combination of essential oils may help.

Galactagogues

Galactagogues are herbal or synthetic substances that may promote lactation. The jasmine flower is a popular home remedy believed to improve lactation.

Lactating mothers in parts of South India wear strings of jasmine flowers in their hair because of its association with increased lactation and delayed ovulation.

Some experts believe that the brain effects of jasmine inhalation may be connected to hormonal changes that result in increased lactation. This theory remains unproven and there is no scientific evidence linking jasmine to increase lactation.

Sedative

While some evidence has confirmed that jasmine oil can increase alertness and energy levels, evidence also shows that it can have a calming effect.

An older study found that the odor of jasmine tea at the lowest concentration had a sedative effect on mood states and nerve activity.

In a more recent pilot study, people with generalized anxiety disorder were asked to inhale jasmine essential oil for 5 minutes a day over 10 days. Jasmine essential oil appeared to significantly bring down the elevated state of mind and improve symptoms such as insomnia, palpitations, and irritability.

How to use jasmine oil  

There are a number of ways to use jasmine oil and other essential oil. How you use them depends on how the oil has been dispensed. Oils in their pure form are more potent and must be diluted.

Be sure to always use jasmine oil as directed on the packaging. Put 3 to 5 drops of the essential oil in an ounce of carrier oil such as sweet almond oil or warmed coconut oil.

Here are ways to use jasmine oil:

in a diffuser
inhaled directly from the bottle
added to a bowl of hot water to create aromatic steam
diluted in a carrier oil and added to a warm bath
mixed with a carrier oil, such as almond oil, and applied topically or as a massage oil
Is jasmine oil safe?  

Jasmine oil is generally considered safe and nonirritating, and reports of skin irritation are very rare. Like any plant, there is always the risk of an allergic reaction. Essential oils must be diluted in a carrier oil before applying to the skin. Essential oils are not meant to be ingested and some are toxic.

You should test new products by placing a small amount of diluted oil on a patch of skin on your forearm. If there’s no reaction in 24 hours, it should be safe to use.

If you are pregnant or nursing, or have a history of severe allergic reactions, speak to a doctor before using any essential oil.

Takeaway 

Jasmine oil is a favorite in aromatherapy for several reasons. You can use this oil to improve your mood and your skin, or simply just enjoy the sweet floral fragrance it adds to your surroundings.