Jasmine - Uses, Side Effects, and More


Overview

Jasmine is a plant. The flower is used to make medicine.

Jasmine has been used for liver disease (hepatitis), pain due to liver scarring (cirrhosis), and abdominal pain due to severe diarrhea (dysentery). It is also used to prevent stroke, to cause relaxation (as a sedative), to heighten sexual desire (as an aphrodisiac), and in cancer treatment.

Jasmine is used on the skin to reduce the amount of breast milk, for skin diseases, and to speed up wound healing.

Jasmine is inhaled to improve mood, reduce stress, and reduce food cravings.

In foods, jasmine is used to flavor beverages, frozen dairy desserts, candy, baked goods, gelatins, and puddings.

In manufacturing, jasmine is used to add fragrance to creams, lotions, and perfumes.

Don't confuse jasmine with plants known as gardenia or gelsemium.

How does it work ?
There isn't enough information to know how jasmine might work.


Uses & Effectiveness ?


Insufficient Evidence for

Mental alertness. Inhaling jasmine aroma during an alertness tests doesn't seem to improve reaction time or number of correct responses. Also, inhaling jasmine aroma during breaks between concentration tests doesn't seem to reduce mental tiredness during the later test.
Cancer treatment.
Increasing sexual desire (as an aphrodisiac)..
Liver disease (hepatitis).
Pain due to liver scarring (cirrhosis).
Stomach pain due to severe diarrhea (dysentery).
Skin diseases.
To cause relaxation (as a sedative).
Wound healing.
Other conditions.

More evidence is needed to rate the effectiveness of jasmine for these uses.


Side Effects

When taken by mouth: Jasmine is LIKELY SAFE for most people in food amounts. There isn't enough reliable information to know if jasmine is safe when taken by mouth as a medicine.

When applied to the skin: There isn't enough reliable information to know if jasmine is safe when applied to the skin as a medicine. Jasmine might cause allergic reactions in some people. 


Special Precautions and Warnings

When taken by mouth: Jasmine is LIKELY SAFE for most people in food amounts. There isn't enough reliable information to know if jasmine is safe when taken by mouth as a medicine.

When applied to the skin: There isn't enough reliable information to know if jasmine is safe when applied to the skin as a medicine. Jasmine might cause allergic reactions in some people. Pregnancy and breast-feeding: There isn't enough reliable information to know if jasmine is safe to use in medicinal amounts when pregnant or breast-feeding. Stay on the safe side and stick to food amounts.


Dosing

The appropriate dose of jasmine depends on several factors such as the user's age, health, and several other conditions. At this time there is not enough scientific information to determine an appropriate range of doses for jasmine. Keep in mind that natural products are not always necessarily safe and dosages can be important. Be sure to follow relevant directions on product labels and consult your pharmacist or physician or other healthcare professional before using.