The Many Benefits of Jasmine Oil for Hair and Scalp

Essential oils are a popular ingredient in many self-care products, from body oils to skin lotions.

In the world of hair care — especially natural hair care — essential oils can offer added benefits to many of the hair products on the market.

Jasmine oil, which comes from the jasmine plant, is a fragrant essential oil that has many beneficial properties for both hair and skin.

In this article, we’ll explore the benefits of jasmine oil for the hair and scalp, as well as how to create your own DIY jasmine oil hair care products.

What are the health benefits of jasmine oil?

Jasmine (Jasminum officinale) is a flowering plant from South Asia that’s most well-known for its gorgeous white flowers and sweet fragrance.

Much like other flowering plants, the jasmine plant can be processed into essential oil. The most common way to extract essential oils is through a process called distillation.

During distillation, water and heat or steam can be used to separate the essential oil components from the plant. Once extracted, jasmine essential oil can be used in many different personal products.

Below, we’ll discuss some of the benefits of using jasmine oil on your hair and skin.
Locks in moisture

Essential oils, such as jasmine oil, act as an emollient to lock moisture into the skin. Emollients are especially important for people who struggle with dry skin, which can be caused by everything from harsh weather to skin conditions.

Jasmine oil can be added to a body lotion to not only improve the fragrance, but also to help boost the moisturizing effect of the lotion.

It can also be used with another carrier oil to produce a body oil, which can be used directly on the skin to retain even more moisture.

As an added benefit, jasmine oil can also be used as a hair oil to help keep the hair and scalp moisturized, especially after a wash session.
Provides antimicrobial benefits

Many essential oils have antimicrobial benefits, and jasmine oil has been shown to demonstrate both antibacterial and antiviral properties.

In one studyTrusted Source from 2008, researchers investigated the antibacterial properties of jasmine essential oil against a strain of E. coli. They found that a variety of the components in jasmine oil were bactericidal against the E. coli.

In addition, a similar studyTrusted Source from 2009 found that jasmine oil components also demonstrated antiviral activity against the hepatitis B virus.

While many of these studies were done using isolated jasmine essential oil components, these benefits may still extend to jasmine oil products for the hair and skin.
Improves mood

One of the most popular uses of essential oils is in aromatherapy. Aromatherapy is a holistic health practice that’s believed to have many benefits, such as reducing pain and improving sleep.

Jasmine oil can be used in a variety of aromatherapy products, such as massage oil or body lotion. When used as an oil or lotion, it can help promote the retention of moisture by forming a protective barrier on the skin.

In addition, the odor of the jasmine plant itself may have some benefits beyond soft skin.

In one small studyTrusted Source, researchers investigated the impact of the jasmine plant on the nervous system. They found that the odor components of the plant, many of which can be found within the essential oil, were able to promote relaxation and improved mood in study participants.
How to use jasmine oil for your hair

From conditioner to styling oil, there are several different ways that jasmine oil can be incorporated into your favorite hair products.
Pre-shampoo conditioner

Pre-shampoo, or pre-poo, conditioner is an essential product in a protective hair care routine.

Pre-poo conditioner is used before a wash session to prep and protect the hair from damage during the shampooing stage.

Here’s how to create and use your own simple jasmine oil pre-poo:
- 1/4 cup plain conditioner
- 1/4 cup olive oil, avocado oil, or coconut oil
- 1/4 teaspoon (tsp.) jasmine essential oil

Combine the plain conditioner, carrier oil, and jasmine essential oil in a large bowl.

Wet the hair and separate it into 4 sections. Apply the pre-poo conditioner evenly to the sections.

Wait 20 to 30 minutes before rinsing out with warm or lukewarm water.

When to use: before shampooing.
Deep conditioner

Deep conditioner is a must-have product for natural and curly hair routines. Most deep conditioners are filled with nutrient-rich ingredients, such as proteins and oils, that help restore strength and moisture.

Here’s how to create and use your own jasmine oil deep conditioner:
- 1/2 avocado
- 1 ripe banana
- 2 tablespoon (tbsp.) olive oil
- 1 tbsp. honey
- 1/4 tsp. jasmine essential oil

Combine the avocado, ripe banana, olive oil, honey, and jasmine essential oil in a food processor. Blend until thoroughly combined.

Wet the hair and separate it into four sections.

Apply the deep conditioner evenly to the sections, and then cover the hair with a thick cap. Wait at least 1 hour before rinsing out with lukewarm or cool water.

When to use: after shampooing.

Hair oil

Hair oil is a great moisturizing and protecting product for natural, thick, and curly hair types. The benefits of hair oil are two-fold: They help soothe and moisturize the scalp, and they help lock moisture into the strands of hair.

Here’s how to create and use your own jasmine oil styling oil:
- 1 tbsp. fractionated coconut oil
- 1 tbsp. argan oil
- 1/2 tbsp. jojoba oil
- 1/4 tsp. vitamin E oil
- 1/4 tsp. jasmine essential oil

Combine the coconut oil, argan oil, jojoba oil, vitamin E oil, and jasmine essential oil in a small bowl.

Part the hair into six to eight sections. Use the fingers to apply the oil directly to the scalp.

Follow up by applying a small amount to the strands. Leave in until the next wash day.

When to use: directly after washing or directly after applying moisturizer.
Styling spray

It is important not to over-wash natural or curly hair, so keeping the hair moisturized between wash sessions is important. A light styling spray with essential oils can help keep hair hydrated and fresh between weekly shampooing.

Here’s how to create and use your own jasmine oil spritzing spray:
- 1/2 cup water
- 2 tbsp. plain leave-in conditioner
- 1 tbsp. olive oil or argan oil
- 1/4 tsp. jasmine essential oil

Combine the water, leave-in conditioner, olive or argan oil, and jasmine essential oil in a blender. Blend until thoroughly combined.

Use a spray bottle to spritz the mixture lightly onto the hair each morning before styling. Leave in until the next wash day.

When to use: daily before styling (between wash sessions).

Is jasmine oil good for all hair types?

Essential oils aren’t just for natural hair — anybody can benefit from using jasmine oil as a part of a healthy hair care routine.

However, there are some hair types that benefit more from essential oils like jasmine oil:
- curly hair
- frizzy hair
- thick hair
- dreadlocks and braided styles
- color-treated hair
- permed hair
- damaged hair

Thick, curly hair types that are susceptible to dryness benefit the most from the moisture- and oil-replenishing properties of jasmine oil.

In addition, hair that’s been subjected to chemical damage, such as from coloring or perming, can also benefit from jasmine oil.

For thinner hair types, jasmine essential oil can still be used in hair care products, such as shampoo and conditioner. However, it may be best to wash the jasmine oil out of thinner hair to avoid a weighed-down look.
HEALTHLINE RESOURCE
Your guide to beauty buzzwords

Confused about which skin care ingredients live up to the hype? You're not alone. Find out which products are worth using or worth skipping.
Jasmine oil product recommendations

If you don’t quite have the time to create your own DIY jasmine oil products, here are a few products to get you started:

- Bain De Terre’s Jasmine Moisturizing Shampoo and Conditioner for Dry Hair. This jasmine-infused shampoo and conditioner is specially formulated for dry hair. It features jasmine essential oil, argan oil, and monoi oil, all of which can help lock in moisture. Purchase online.
- Bambo Earth’s 100% Organic Shampoo Bar. This jasmine shampoo bar is an organic and ecofriendly way to treat your hair. It features high quality plant essential oils, like jasmine oil, to moisturize your hair and scalp. Purchase online.
- Botanical Beauty’s Organic Jasmine Flower Butter. This jasmine flower butter is a raw, natural butter made with jasmine oil extract. It can be used on both hair and skin and combined with other ingredients to make DIY jasmine hair products. Purchase online.
- Provence Beauty’s Honeysuckle Jasmine Multi-Use Oil. This natural jasmine oil blend is formulated to be used on both hair and skin. It contains vitamin E and other beneficial compounds to promote healthy, happy hair. Purchase online.

Key takeaways
Jasmine essential oil has many beneficial properties. It can help keep the skin and hair moisturized, offer a barrier of protection against microbes, and soothe and relax the senses.
You can combine jasmine oil with other moisturizing ingredients to create hair products such as pre-poo, deep conditioner, hair oil, or styling spray.
Although it may be pricey, you can find pure jasmine oil anywhere that essential oils are sold.