9 Reasons Why Jasmine Tea Is Good for You

Jasmine tea is a type of tea, scented with the aroma of blossoms from the jasmine plant.

It’s typically based on green tea, but sometimes black or white tea is used instead.

Blossoms from common jasmine (Jasminum officinale) or sampaguita (Jasminum sambac) are placed alongside tea leaves in storage or blended with stored tea, allowing the aroma to infuse.

Because jasmine tea is typically made from green tea leaves, it provides many of the same powerful health benefits that you would get from drinking green tea.

Here are 9 reasons why drinking jasmine tea is great for your health.

Share on Pinterest

We include products we think are useful for our readers. If you buy through links on this page, we may earn a small commission. Here’s our process.

1. Bursting with antioxidants

Jasmine tea is loaded with powerful plant-based compounds known as polyphenols.

These act as antioxidants in your body and protect your cells against free radical damage. Studies have linked free radical damage to heart disease and several types of cancer

Jasmine tea made from green tea is high in polyphenols called catechins.

One particularly powerful catechin in green tea is epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which has been linked to many benefits, including weight loss and improved blood sugar control, as well as heart and oral health


What’s more, green tea catechins like EGCG have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and blood-lipid-lowering effects, which may reduce your risk of heart disease

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea is high in polyphenols that act as antioxidants in your body. It also contains the powerful polyphenol EGCG, which is linked to many health benefits like reduced heart disease risk.
ADVERTISEMENT

2. May aid weight loss

Drinking jasmine tea may help you lose weight by speeding up your metabolism.

In fact, a review of several studies suggests that green tea — the most common base for jasmine tea — may speed up your metabolism by 4–5% and increase fat burning by 10–16%

While 4–5% may seem insignificant, it could mean burning an extra 70–100 calories per day

The fat burning properties of jasmine tea are related to its content of caffeine and the polyphenol EGCG. These compounds may also enhance each other’s fat burning effects

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea made from green tea may aid weight loss by boosting your metabolism.
3. Could protect your heart

Jasmine tea is high in polyphenols, which may help protect against heart disease.

In animal and test-tube studies, tea polyphenols have been shown to protect LDL (bad) cholesterol from oxidizing — a process that raises your risk of heart disease

Oxidized LDL cholesterol is potentially harmful, as it’s more likely to stick to your artery walls and form plaques. This could narrow or clog your blood vessels

In one study, supplementing with green tea polyphenols — which is also found in jasmine tea based on green tea — reduced plaque formation by up to 68% in hamsters. It also lowered heart disease risk factors, such as LDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels 

Other studies link tea consumption to a lower risk of heart disease as well.

For instance, an analysis of 5 studies discovered that people who drank 3 cups (710 ml) or more of green or black tea daily had a 21% lower risk of heart disease on average 

Another study found that people who drank 1–3 cups (237–710 ml) of green tea per day had a 19% lower risk of heart attacks and a 36% reduced risk of strokes, compared to people that drank less than 1 cup (237 ml) daily 

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea polyphenols may help protect against heart disease by preventing LDL (bad) cholesterol from oxidizing and potentially clogging your arteries.
4. Promotes good oral health

Jasmine tea is typically based on green tea, which is packed with catechins. Catechins are a group of polyphenols that may help protect against tooth decay — or cavities — by killing plaque-forming bacteria like Streptococcus mutans (4


In a study in 15 people, a solution containing green tea catechins stopped Streptococcus mutans from producing acid when applied to the teeth. Too much acid can erode your teeth’s enamel — the hard surface of your teeth

Another study in 30 people noted that using a green tea catechin-based mouthwash for 1 week was just as effective at reducing dental plaque as an antiseptic mouthwash 

Not to mention, some studies suggest that jasmine tea may combat bad breath by reducing odor-causing bacteria 

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea polyphenols may help neutralize plaque-forming bacteria like Streptococcus mutans. In addition, it may combat bad breath.
5. Could boost brain function

Jasmine tea has several properties that could help boost brain function.

For starters, it contains 15–60 mg of caffeine per cup (237 ml) — depending on how long the tea leaves steep and which type of tea is used as a base.

Caffeine stimulates your nervous system by blocking the inhibitory neurotransmitter adenosine — a chemical that delivers signals between your brain and body. Normally, adenosine helps your body relax 

In addition, caffeine enhances brain activity and assists the release of other mood-enhancing neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin 

Collectively, this makes you feel more alert and energized and improves short-term memory 

Jasmine tea also contains the amino acid L-theanine, which triggers the release of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) — an inhibitory neurotransmitter that puts you into a relaxed and attentive state.

When taken together, L-theanine and caffeine appear to be more effective at boosting brain function.


SUMMARY
Jasmine tea contains caffeine and L-theanine, which may help keep you more alert and vigilant. Plus, it may improve short-term memory.
WATCH MORE IN FOOD BENEFITS
The 5 Best Foods to Eat When You’re Sick
Under the weather? Though you may not be thinking about food, eating the right foods when sick can do much more than just give you energy.
 
Watch More
6. May protect against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease

Jasmine tea is packed with powerful polyphenols, which may lower your risk of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.

In particular, jasmine tea made from green tea is high in EGCG, which may suppress inflammation and neutralize free radical damage — two key factors associated with the progression of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease (21


Test-tube studies show that EGCG stops proteins in the brain from misfolding and clumping. This could reduce your risk of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, as misfolded proteins may promote inflammation and damage brain nerves (23


A review of 8 studies in more than 5,600 people discovered that people who regularly drank teas like green tea — the most common base for jasmine tea — had a 15% lower risk of Parkinson’s disease than non-tea drinkers 

An analysis of 26 studies in over 52,500 people linked daily consumption of teas high in EGCG — like green tea — to a 35% lower risk of brain disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease 

SUMMARY
Drinking green tea — which is common bases for jasmine tea — has been linked to a lower risk of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.
7. May lower your risk of type 2 diabetes

Globally, more than 422 million people have diabetes 

Type 2 diabetes is the most common type and occurs when your body cannot use insulin effectively. Insulin is a hormone that helps move sugar from your blood into your cells.

Jasmine tea made from green tea may lower your risk of type 2 diabetes. It contains the compound EGCG, which may help your body use insulin more effectively and reduce blood sugar levels 

An analysis of 17 studies in 1,133 people showed that green tea consumption significantly reduced fasting blood sugar and insulin levels 

Another analysis of 12 studies in more than 760,000 people found that drinking 3 cups (710 ml) or more of tea daily was linked to a 16% lower risk of type 2 diabetes 

SUMMARY
Studies show that drinking jasmine green tea may help your body use insulin more effectively and reduce blood sugar levels. This may help lower your risk of type 2 diabetes.
8. May reduce your risk of certain cancers

Jasmine tea is high in antioxidants that help reduce free radical damage and may have cancer-fighting properties.

Test-tube and animal studies found that polyphenols — such as the ECGC in green tea — reduced tumor size, stimulated cancer cell death, and suppressed the growth and spread of cancer cells (31


In a review, green tea polyphenols stopped the growth and spread of bladder cancer cells and induced cancer cell death in animal and test-tube research. However, human studies on green tea polyphenols and bladder cancer showed inconsistent results 

What’s more, a study observed that drinking 10 Japanese-sized cups (40.6 ounces or 1.2 liters) of green tea daily, supplemented with tablets of green tea extract, reduced the recurrence of colon cancer cells in people with colon cancer by 51.6% 

Additionally, drinking green tea has been associated with a lower risk of prostate and breast cancer


Though these results are promising, more high-quality human studies on jasmine tea and cancer risk are needed before it can be confidently recommended.

SUMMARY
Animal, test-tube, and human research show that jasmine tea polyphenols may help suppress the growth and spread of cancer cells — but more research in this area is needed.
9. Delicious and easy to add to your diet

Jasmine tea is not only very healthy but also delicious and easy to add to your diet. It has a fragrant floral aroma with a sweet, subtle taste.

The tea can be purchased as tea bags, loose leaves, and pearls. Still, it’s best to choose loose leaves or pearls, as tea bags typically contain broken leaves and other undesired parts of the plant that can affect the tea’s taste.

To prepare the leaves or pearls, simply add them to a pot and add hot water between 160–180°F (70–80°C). Avoid using boiling water as it can ruin the tea’s delicate flavor. Let the tea steep for 3–5 minutes, then strain and serve.

Jasmine tea is widely available and can be purchased from your local health food store or online.

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea is delicious and has a sweet, subtle, and refreshing taste. It’s easy to prepare and can be purchased from local health food stores or online.
Safety and side effects

Generally speaking, jasmine tea is incredibly healthy with little to no side effects.

However, it does contain caffeine, which may cause issues for some people. Side effects of ingesting too much caffeine include anxiety, restlessness, jitters, and stomach issues 

Pregnant women should limit their caffeine intake as it may raise miscarriage risk.

Jasmine tea also contains catechins, which could reduce your body’s ability to absorb iron from foods. In high quantities, catechins may increase your risk of iron deficiency anemia 

Still, this mostly applies to people at risk of iron deficiency, including pregnant women, young children, and people with dietary restrictions.

That said, if you’re at risk of iron deficiency, consider drinking jasmine tea between meals instead of with meals — or waiting at least an hour after eating to drink the tea.

SUMMARY
Jasmine tea is generally safe, but people who are sensitive to caffeine or those at risk of iron deficiency may need to watch their intake.
The bottom line

Jasmine tea is an incredibly healthy tea typically based on green or black tea leaves.

It’s packed with antioxidants and has been linked to many impressive health benefits.

For example, drinking jasmine tea may lower your risk of heart disease, mental decline, and certain cancers. It may also help you lose weight, improve oral health, and boost brain function.

Best of all, jasmine tea is delicious and easy to add to your diet. Try adding the tea to your diet to reap its impressive health benefits.