Jasmine Medicinal Uses

For medicinal purpose various parts of plant such as leaves and flowers are used. The plant parts exhibit astringent/constricts tissues, acrid, thermogenic/ heat generating, aphrodisiac, antiseptic, pain relieving, purifying, increase flow of blood in pelvic region, emollient, urine stimulating, ant-parasitic, deobstruant, teeth-cleaning, pus-discharging and tonic properties.

Jasmine is a very well-known for its small, strongly scented white flowers which blooms at night during spring-summer. This plant is native to Asia and Africa. In India, it is found throughout the country. Jasmine grows wild in sub-tropical North-West Himalayas, Western Ghats, Nilgiris, hills and cultivated in various states such as Kumaon, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. Jasmine is a medicinal plant that is used from time immemorial for the treatment of a variety of diseases.

Taxonomical or Scientific Classification
KINGDOM: Plantae- Plants
SUBKINGDOM: Tracheobionts- Vascular plants
DIVISION: Magnoliophyta- Flowering plants
CLASS: Magnoliopsida- Dicotyledons
ORDER: Scrophulariales
FAMILY: Oleaceae- Olive family
GENUS: Jasminum
SPECIES: grandiflorum
Latin name: Jasminum grandiflorum;SYNONYM: Jasminum officinale Linn. var. grandiflorum (L.) Kobuski.
Vernacular names
ENGLISH: Jasmine
KANNADA: Jati Maltiga, Sanna Jati Mallige
MALYALAM: Pichi
TAMIL: Pichi, Jatimalli
TELUGU: Jati, Sannajati
URDU: Chameli, Yasmeen
COMMON INDIAN NAME: Chameli
SIDDHA: Manmadabanam, Mullai, Padar-malligai MALAY: Melur
PROPAGATION: by cutting
PLANT TYPE: Shrub
PLANT PARTS USED: whole plant
Plant Description

Large scrambling sub erect twining evergreen shrub;leaves opposite 3 to 7, ovate to elliptic in shape, three paired foliates ending with a single leaf at the tip;leaflets elongate-lanceolate, acute, 7 to 11 terminal leaflet;Flowers terminal and axillary, cymes, calyx lobes long and linear.

In Science

Nowadays various studies are being done on medicinal herbs. Surprisingly, scientific studies affirms and supports the traditional curative use of such plants.

Many studies are done of J. grandiflorum leaves, flowers and oil. The leaves have shown Anti-ulcerogenic activity in aspirin, alcohol and acetic acid induces ulcer experiments in rats.

Due to the presence of alkaloids, glycoside, flavanoid, terpines, tannin, resin, and salicylic acid the plant has Antimicrobial, Antibacterial activity. The flowers possess potential wound healing properties may be due to the presence of protease (one of the key enzyme for wound healing).

Ayurvedic properties

Ayurvedic name of jasmine is Jati, Jatika, Jatimalli, Chameli, and Malti. Medicinal use of this plant is mentioned in classical Ayurvedic treatise. Ayurveda describes its properties as below:

Rasa (Taste): Tikta/Bitter, kashaya/Astringent,

Guna (Characteristics): Laghu/Light, Snigdha/Unctuous, Mridu

Virya (Potency): Ushna/Hot

Vipaka (Post Digestive Effect): Katu/Pungent

Jati or Chameli is used in some important Ayurvedic formulation such as Jatyadi Taila, Jatyadi Ghrita, Vasant Kusmakar Rasa, etc.

Medicinal uses of Jasmine

For the medicinal purpose various parts of the plant such as leaves and flowers are used. The plant parts exhibit astringent/constricts tissues, acrid, thermogenic/ heat generating, aphrodisiac, antiseptic, pain relieving, purifying, increase flow of blood in pelvic region, emollient, urine stimulating, ant-parasitic, deobstruant, teeth-cleaning, pus-discharging and tonic properties.

Leaves are used in the treatment of swollen spongy gums, ulcers, and loose teeth, tooth-ache, skin diseases, pain in ear, pus in ear, ulcer, painful periods, and wound.

Flowers are used in eye diseases, ulcers, skin diseases, itching, diseases of teeth, etc. Jasmine oil has anti-depressant, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, aphrodisiac, and sedative properties and used in the treatment of Depression, nervous exhaustion, stress related conditions and in child birth. It is used during labour to strengthen the contraction.

Ulcers in groups in the mouth/tongue, Stomatitis(inflammation of the mouth and lips):

Few leaves can be chewed.
Prepare decoction (boil 25-50 g leaves in 500 ml water) of leaves by boiling in water and gargle, few times a day.

Bad breath:Chewing of Jasmine leaves is helpful.

Skin diseases, Psoriasis:

Topically apply jasmine oil.
Prepare paste of leaves and apply topically on the affected skin area.
Prepare powder of dried Jasmine roots. In this mix Calamus/Bach root powder in equal amount. Make a paste by mixing with lemon juice and apply topically on the affected skin area.

Swelling, wound:Prepare paste of leaves and apply at affected body part.

Pus discharge from the ear (aka Kaan ki peeb/pus), pain in ear, Pus discharge from wounds:Medicated oil of leaves is used as ear drop. This is prepared by boiling clean jasmine leaves paste in Sesame oil (both are taken in equal amount) till all water is evaporated and only oil is left. Two drops of this oil is put in ear.

Corns on Feet, Corns on Toes:The leaves juice is applied externally.

Eye Pupil Outgrowth (aka Aankh ki Phuli):The remedy is to grind flower petals (5) with small amount of Misri and apply.

Paralysis:The root paste is applied.

Skin dryness, glowing skin:Apply paste of jasmine flowers.

Decreasing milk production in lactating mother:Prepare poultice of Jasmine flowers and apply to breasts.

Side-effects/ Warning

Do not use in pregnancy.

Here is given medicinal uses of Jasmine. Do not confuse it with Yellow-Jasmine which is Gelsemium sempervirens (toxic plant).
