5 Proven Health Benefits of Jasmine and Why You Must Have it in Your Garden

Jasmine or Mogra plant bears white flowers and it is an evergreen shrub with dark green foliage. The specialty of this flower is it only blooms at night and gives off an aromatic fragrance. The Jasmine plant has its roots in Middle East and has a natural exotic quality about it.
Jasmine or Mogra plant bears white flowers and it is an evergreen shrub with dark green foliage. The specialty of this flower is it only blooms at night and gives off an aromatic fragrance. The Jasmine plant has its roots in Middle East and has a natural exotic quality about it.


Benefits of Jasmine Plant

There are many reasons to grow this beautiful aromatic plant in your garden and some of them are listed below:
- Jasmine Aromatherapy
- Health benefits of Jasmine
- Health Benefits of Jasmine Tea
- Skin benefits of Arabian Jasmine
- Health benefits of Jasmine Hair Oil


Jasmine Aromatherapy

It is a scientific name that translates to something like “A gift from God” and this certainly is a fitting name. There are many discoveries that have shown that this plant was used by the Egyptians & Greeks for aromatherapy. It was widely used as a natural aphrodisiac capable of promoting, love, romance, and passion. You can use this plant in gardening as therapeutic & healing activity and also treat your mental burnout. 


Health benefits of Jasmine

There are many health benefits of Jasmine. It tends to reduce depression & stress just by being in an area near you. Jasmine was used as medicine in earlier days because it can heal the wounds. In another way, it also alleviates the pain by reducing backaches and headaches. Jasmine oil is still used in massage therapies, which can help in aiding arthritis.


Benefits of Jasmine Tea

Jasmine tea is a popular Ayurvedic medicine, because of its unique properties, which can improve cardiovascular health & increase the anti-oxidants in the body. It helps in ridding the body of everything, that is affecting us negatively, which in turn helps us feel very light & free of stress. Jasmine tea is a part of many weights loss diets because it reduces the fat cells in the body and maintains the proper weight more quickly. 


Skin benefits of Arabian Jasmine

Studies have shown that Jasmine has a chemical such as coumarins and flavonoids, which help in detoxifying the body & increase vascular health. It is beneficial for the skin because its oil act as a moisturizer & natural deodorant. 


Health benefits of Jasmine Hair Oil

Jasmine oil is beneficial for your hair because of its anti-lice properties, and it can treat scalp infections very effectively. It also has conditioning properties that promote radiant and stronger hair. By using this oil, you can simply have those long hairs.