Plants of Genus Mentha: From Farm to Food Factory

Abstract

Genus Mentha, a member of Lamiaceae family, encompasses a series of species used on an industrial scale and with a well-described and developed culture process. Extracts of this genus are traditionally used as foods and are highly valued due to the presence of significant amounts of antioxidant phenolic compounds. Many essential oil chemotypes show distinct aromatic flavor conferred by different terpene proportions. Mint extracts and their derived essential oils exert notable effects against a broad spectrum of bacteria, fungi or yeasts, tested both in vitro or in various food matrices. Their chemical compositions are well-known, which suggest and even prompt their safe use. In this review, genus Mentha plant cultivation, phytochemical analysis and even antimicrobial activity are carefully described. Also, in consideration of its natural origin, antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, a special emphasis was given to mint-derived products as an interesting alternative to artificial preservatives towards establishing a wide range of applications for shelf-life extension of food ingredients and even foodstuffs. Mentha cultivation techniques markedly influence its phytochemical composition. Both extracts and essential oils display a broad spectrum of activity, closely related to its phytochemical composition. Therefore, industrial implementation of genus Mentha depends on its efficacy, safety and neutral taste.

1. Introduction

Medicinal plants represent a significant source of therapeutic remedies, being also the basis of traditional or indigenous healing systems, still widely used by the majority of populations in many countries. Recently, the ethnopharmacological potentials of these plant matrices have received important consideration by both scientists and the pharmaceutical industry towards complementing or even replacing conventional pharmacotherapies. Moreover, many of these plants have also been highlighted for their added-food value ability, providing a dual role, i.e., food flavor and bioactive compounds.

Mentha species belong to the family Lamiaceae and are widely distributed in Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and North America. Plants from this genus can be found in multiple and diverse environments. Recent data, based on morphological, cytological and genetic characteristics, have shown that genus Mentha can be classified into 42 species, 15 hybrids and hundreds of subspecies, varieties and cultivars. Indeed, mint taxonomy is highly complex and there is not always a consensus. The Mentha genus is often divided into 5 sections: Audibertia, Eriodontes, Mentha, Preslia, and Pulegium. Most Mentha species are perennial, contain essential oils, and are widely cultivated as industrial crops for essential oil production. A clear definition of an essential oil is mostly based on pharmaceutical standards. Typically, they are odorous products, with a complex composition, obtained from a botanically defined raw plant material by steam or dry distillation, or even by another suitable mechanical process without heating. The term “essential oil” comes from the sense that it contains “the essence of” the plant’s fragrance, not to be confused with its being essential for the functioning of plant cells or plant homeostasis. The main Mentha oil producers are USA, India and China. The most economically important species are Mentha aquatica L., Mentha canadensis L., Mentha spicata L. (spearmint) and their hybrids (including Mentha × piperita L., widely known as peppermint, a sterile and first-generation hybrid between M. aquatica and M. spicata). Leaves, flowers and stems of Mentha species have traditionally been used as herbal teas and spices in many foods to add aroma and flavor. Fresh and dried plant material, raw extracts and essential oils of mint plants are used as a part of confectionary, as flavor enhancing agents in toothpastes, chewing gums and beverages, bakery, cosmetics, as oral hygiene products, pharmaceuticals and pesticides. The two most popular mint flavors are due to (−)-menthol, a terpene alcohol with strong, intense and refreshing peppermint flavor, mostly obtained from M. aquatica and M. canadensis hybrids, and R-(-)-carvone, a terpene ketone with a typical flavor of Maghrebi mint tea or mint cocktails, obtained from M. spicata. Another distinct flavor can be obtained from linalool-rich species, a terpene alcohol, for example M. arvensis L. Also, (−)-menthol, in its pure form (extracted or synthetized), can also be used in the food and cosmetic industries. Indeed, mint species have a long history of use, and are well-known for their medicinal properties. Mint species, in particular their essential oils, and even menthol have been described in distinct monographs, such as European, Japanese and Russian pharmacopoeias.

Mentha leaves have traditionally been used as tea in the treatment of headache, fever, digestive disorders and various minor ailments. Furthermore, mint essential oils have been widely used in the treatment of mild-intensity fungal and bacterial infections of human skin, headache syndromes and postherpetic neuralgia. In modern medicine, Mentha species are widely used in the treatment of gastrointestinal tract disorders. For example, Mentha longifolia (L.) methanolic extract, rich in eucalyptol, showed antiulcer activity against acetic acid-induced colitis in rats, perhaps attributed to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, although the observed effect was not dose-dependent. The anti-inflammatory effect of mint essential oils is being corroborated by some clinical studies; for example, M. spicata essential oil is able to reduce pain in osteoarthritis patients. This analgesic effect is mostly related to the main components of M. spicata essential oil, like carvone, limonene and menthol.

The interest in studying mint for human beings is majorly related to its phytosanitary effects. In fact, M. pulegium L. essential oil showed high efficiency against the food pest Sitophilus granaries, and could additionally be used as a bio-insecticide. M. × piperita L. aqueous extract improved radish seedlings (Raphanus sativus L.) defensive responses against oxidative stress and had inhibitory effects on seed germination and seedling growth, thus representing a huge area of interest for natural herbicide formulation. Mint phenols have also shown strong antioxidant, acetylcholinesterase (AChE), butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) and histone deacetylase inhibitory effects.

2. Genus Mentha Plant Cultivation

Mints are a group of perennial herbs commercially cultivated in different parts of the world. It is believed that the genus originated in the Mediterranean basin and, from there, spread to the rest of the world by both natural and artificial means. M. arvensis is cultivated on a huge scale in Brazil, China, Paraguay, Japan, Thailand, Angola and India. Peppermint is grown in the USA, Morocco, Argentina, France, Hungary, Italy and Switzerland. Spearmint (M. spicata) is mainly cultivated in the USA, and bergamot mint (several hybrids rich in linalool and linalyl acetate) is native to Europe and has been naturalized in the eastern USA. Spearmint and bergamot mint are significantly less cultivated than peppermint. Currently, most of the commercially important mints are hybrids or amphiploids.

2.1. Agro-Climatic Requirements
M. arvensis can be cultivated both in tropical and sub-tropical areas. It does not grow well in areas with damp winters which cause root rot. A temperature of about 20–25 °C promotes vegetative growth, but essential oil and menthol concentrations have been reported to increase at a higher temperature (30 °C). Peppermint and spearmint cannot be profitably grown in tropical and subtropical areas. Peppermint is grown in cool to temperate regions. It needs long days with warm to hot conditions and cool nights to ensure the right balance of essential oil compounds, produced during the growing phase. Optimum temperature is between 21 and 26 °C for peppermint growth and flowering. Bergamot mint can be grown both in temperate and sub-tropical areas. However, higher yields are observed in temperate climates, and rainfall should be around 100–110 cm. Light showers at planting time and sunny days at the harvesting stage are best for high yield and good quality of leaves.

2.2. Soil
Mints are not fussy about soil types and can tolerate a fairly wide range of soil chemistry and conditions. Loam and sandy loam to deep soil, rich in humus is ideal for mint cultivation. The most important factors to consider are pH (6–7.5), organic content, overall water holding capacity and drain ability. Indeed, fresh weight, dry weight and essential oil yield of peppermint are influenced by soil pH.

2.3. Land Preparation
Land must be cleared with ploughing to release weeds. Mint needs thorough two cross harrowing to bring the soil to fine tilth. About 25–30 tons of farm yard manure (compost)/ha has to be applied as a basal dressing during the last ploughing to incorporate manure with soil. Green manure, like sun-hemp (Crotalaria juncea L.), should be used before plantation. Raised beds are the best and most economical way to grow mint.

2.4. Propagation
Mints are perennial herbs propagated mainly by vegetative means rather than seeds. In fact, seed propagation has been practiced by some farmers, namely M. arvensis, M. pulegium and M. spicata, as these species produce viable seeds. Peppermint is a popular and commercially grown hybrid mint, but is sterile, therefore its propagation exclusively depends on vegetative parts, like green shoots, underground stolons and rooty turions. El-Keltawi and Croteau have observed a maximum rooting percentage using etiolated rhizome, which was used as a single node cutting. It has also been estimated that 1 ha of well-grown plant material can supply a cropping area of 7 to 10 ha.

2.5. Planting
Planting materials are cut into small pieces and planted in shallow furrows about 7 to 10 cm deep with a row to row distance of 45–60 cm either manually or mechanically. The plot needs irrigation immediately after planting, and depending on cultivation procedure, soil and climatic factors, plantation lasts about 3 to 5 years.

2.6. Fertilization
Exhaustive studies have been made to understand the role of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) requirements on herbage production and essential oil yield. Indeed, N application at 160 kg N/ha for M. arvensis, 125 kg N/ha for M. × piperita, 100–120 kg N/ha for M. aquatica and M. spicata give a higher dry matter amount and essential oil yield. Helsel and Fluck have shown a correlation between N fertilizer application and (−)-carvone and limonene concentrations in Mentha × gentilis L. Generally, 80–120 kg N fertilizer, 50 kg P2O5 and 40 kg K2O/ha is required for a good mint crop. In fact, experiments conducted at the Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CIMAP, Lucknow, India) have shown that the application of 20 kg/ha sulphur (S) increase M. spicata foliage and essential oil yield.

2.7. Irrigation
Mint requires frequent and adequate irrigation. Fully developed plants are watered at least three times a week. It is important to keep the soil constantly moist, although well drained. The crop has high water demands in summer. Care has to be taken to prevent a waterlogged soil, especially in winter, as this will influence growth.

Several studies have shown that peppermint and spearmint biomass production is highly sensitive to water stress. Therefore, to increase peppermint yield, furrow irrigation is preferred to sprinkler irrigation, which damages leaf oil cells gland and reduces marketable oil yield. Mitchell and Yang reported that alternate furrow irrigation method is more advantageous over conventional furrow irrigation, as it allows frequent application of small water amounts.


2.8. Effect of Cultivation Conditions on Essential Oil Content
Environmental stress can negatively affect the quality of peppermint essential oil. Depending on the edaphoclimatic conditions, the content of phenolics and terpenes can be different. For example, the concentration of menthol in peppermint is higher in flowering stage than during budding period. Research on biotechnological methods for mint oil production has gained pivotal attention due to its economic prospects. Several strategies were attempted for cloning and characterizing key genes involved in mint oil components biosynthesis. DNA library creation encoding oil gland secretory cells and the collection of sequence tag expression provide information on gene expression and metabolic regulation of essential oil biosynthesis.

2.9. Pests and Diseases

Like other cultivated medicinal plants, mints are also susceptible to exposure to a wide variety of pests and diseases, causing significant crop loss and deterioration of mint oils quality. Different causal organisms, including fungi, insects, nematodes, bacteria virus and phytoplasma, are among to the common threats on mint cultivation. Among these fungi, Puccinia menthae (rust), Alternaria alternata (leaf spot); Verticillium dahliae (wilt), Phoma stasserti (stem rot), Rhizoctonia solani (root and stolon rot) and Erysiphe cichoracearum (powdery mildew) cause serious economic loss worldwide. In fact, diseases control through chemicals appears to be more attractive, though alternative strategies like botanicals and biopesticides are also practiced to prevent mint diseases. Additionally, mint diseases control can also be achieved through breeding programs that develop resistant clones.

2.10. Harvesting
Mint harvesting must take place at the proper time, since harvesting timings that are too early or too late result in immature or over-mature crops, which ultimately gives poor essential oil quality and quantity. Another important factor is the number of harvests per year, which also influences forage yield and essential oil composition. The crop must be harvested when plants are in full bloom, in the late morning on a dry sunny day, when all dew traces have disappeared. According to climatic conditions, one or two crop flushes are harvested. In addition, mint essential oil quality differs between first and second harvest, as does the oil content between the first and second year of M. arvensis harvest. In brief, the plant gives the best crop in second and third year after planting.