Medicinal Uses, Phytochemistry, Pharmacology, and Toxicology of Mentha spicata

Abstract

Mentha spicata, also called Mentha viridis, is a medicinal plant of the Lamiaceae family characterized by its potency to synthesize and secret secondary metabolites, essentially essential oils. Different populations use the aerial parts of this plant for tea preparation, and this tisane has shown several effects, according to ethnopharmacological surveys carried out in different areas around the world. These effects are attributed to different compounds of M. spicata, in which their biological effects were recently proved experimentally. Pharmacological properties of M. spicata extracts and essential oils were investigated for different health benefits such as antioxidant, anticancer, antiparasitic, antimicrobial, and antidiabetic effects. In vitro and in vivo studies showed positives effects that could be certainly related to different bioactive compounds identified in M. spicata. Indeed, volatile compounds seem to be efficient in inhibiting different microbial agents such as bacteria, fungi, and parasites through several mechanisms. Moreover, M. spicata exhibited, according to some studies, promising antioxidant, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects, which show its potential to be used as a source for identifying natural drugs against cellular oxidative stress and its related diseases. Importantly, toxicological investigations of M. spicata show the safety of this species at different doses and several periods of use which justify its use in traditional medicines as tisane with tea. Here, we report, explore, and highlight the data published on M. spicata concerning its botanical description and geographical distribution, its phytochemical compounds, its pharmacological properties, and its toxicological investigations of M. spicata.
1. Introduction

The use of M. spicata is importantly characterized in several populations, including Moroccan population, which has used the aerial parts (with tea) of this plant since time against several diseases including diabetes, digestive and respiratory disorders, throat ailments, and skin disease.

Certainly, M. spicata contains molecules biologically active having biological effects, and effective spectroscopic analysis of extracts and essential oils of M. spicata using GC-MS, HPLC, HPLC-MS, and RMN revealed the presence of several phytochemical bioactive compounds belonging to different classes of secondary metabolites in particularly the classes of flavonoids, phenolic acids, and terpene. Indeed, the distribution of these chemical compounds between different plant parts and collection regions is variable, which explains different traditional uses (with efficacy) of this species according to each region. In addition, the extraction of these chemical compounds depends on used methods and therefore can justify the difference in traditional applications according to used methods of pharmaceutical formulations preparation.

In vitro and in vivo experimental explorations showed that M. spicata extracts and essential oils exhibit remarkable biological activities, including antimicrobial, antiparasitic, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects. Indeed, different organic extracts (rich in bioactive compounds) revealed important antifungal activity by their potency to inhibit the growth of some strains involved in human infections such as Aspergillus niger, Candida albicans, Cryptococcus neoformans, and Microsporum audouinii. Moreover, M. spicata showed antibacterial properties against various bacterial strains, either clinical or reference. It was also revealed that M. spicata extracts target some human complex diseases, including chronic inflammatory diseases, diabetes, and cancers. Plant extracts inhibit or activate targets and/or pathways involved in these pathologies, including membrane receptors, signaling pathways, and molecular targets.

To the best of our knowledge, despite numerous investigations that have been carried out until now showing remarkable results, there are now literature reviews exploring M. spicata as a source of potential lead compounds. Therefore, this review aims to explore, discuss, and highlight all data concerning M. spicata and give suggestions about its exploitation as a source for developing bioactive compounds in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic fields.

2. Research Methodology
...

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Taxonomy, Botanical Description, Geographic Distribution, and Ecological Factors

Mentha spicata (ID: 29719) is also known as spearmint. There are a couple of heterotypic synonyms for this species including Mentha cordifolia, Mentha crispa var. crispata f. reticulata, Mentha viridis (L.) L., Mentha × cordifolia, and Mentha × villosa var. cordifolia. It is an aromatic plant that belongs to the genus Mentha, family Lamiaceae, subfamily Nepetoideae, placed in Magnoliopsida class, and belongs to order Lamiales. The genus Mentha, one of the most important members of the Lamiaceae family, is represented by 19 species and 13 natural hybrids, and Lamiaceae family consists of over 7000 species and around 260 genera of trees and shrubs. The spearmint, M. spicata, is a hybrid of M. longifolia and M. rotundifolia. This species is widely grown in Europe, North America, and Asia, but nowadays cultivated throughout all regions of the world.

M. spicata L. (spearmint) is a creeping rhizomatous, glabrous, and perennial herb with a strong aromatic odor, growing up to 30–100 cm tall with variably hairless to hairy stems and foliage, and a wide spreading fleshy underground rhizome. The leaves are ovate to lancolate, 5–9 cm long and 1.5–3 cm broad, with a serrated margin. Spearmint produces flowers in slender spikes, each flower pink or white, and 2.5–3 mm long and broad. The stem is square-shaped, a trademark of the mint family of herbs. M. spicata L is well adapted to climatic conditions in tropical and subtropical areas. It can be cultivated in wide range of soils and found in back gardens of homesteads.
3.2. Medicinal Uses

Mentha viridis is widely used in a variety of applications. Since ancient times, Western and Eastern cultures have practiced Mentha viridis as a medicinal and aromatic plant against several diseases (Table 1). Ethnobotanical investigations into Mentha viridis have suggested its potential medical applications in different disorders. It has beneficial effects on diabetes, digestive, skin, and respiratory disorders.

In Morocco, Mentha viridis is a medicinal plant most used in the treatment of throat ailments. The use of this plant to treat throat ailments has been demonstrated by Orch et al., who reported the use of aerial parts’ infusion of Mentha viridis in Moroccan oriental folklore. The leaves of M. viridis are also administered as a decoction to treat diabetes in the Al Haouz-Rhamna region (Morocco) Idm’ hand et al. showed that the leaves and stems of M. viridis are also used as a decoction and infusion to treat diabetes; on the other hand, El-hilaly et al. showed that these parts were used to treat headache and tiredness. The leaves and flowers of M. viridis have also been widely used to treat asthma, bronchitis, chest pain, lung disorders, kidney problems, and diuretics by decoction or infusion. In addition, the leaves of M. viridis have been used against gastric disorders by decoction, and the stems are used against ailments of intestines. M. viridis whole plant infusions are also used to treat aphrodisiac, cold, flatulence, headache, tonic, and toothache. In another study in Morocco, the powder from the leaves of M. viridis is used to treat skin diseases.

3.3. Phytochemical Compounds

Extracts and essential oils extracted from M. spicata (viridis) are considered as valuable source phytochemicals, including natural phenolics and EOS. These volatile compounds are complex mixtures of substances that have been found to create different chemotypes distinguished based on the dominant compound in the essential oil, which depends on the plant species, and within the same variety, the essential oil composition can vary according to the geographical region. In terms of phytochemical content, terpenes and terpenoids are the major components of EOs obtained from aerial parts of M. spicata. Thus, more detailed discussion regarding chemical aspects of EOs of these species is described (Table 2). Previous studies reported the existence of different chemotypes in the chemical composition of M. spicata, naturally grown as cultivated, around the world, and the essential oil mainly composed of carvone, carvacrol, trans-carveol, piperitone oxide, limonene, 1,8-cinéole, camphene, p-cymene, dihydrocarvone, pulegone, β-caryophyllene, germacrene D, menthone, α-pinene, and linalool5, 26, 27]; whereas, carvone is mentioned as the absolute predominant constituent of M. spicata oil as well as monoterpenes including linalool, piperitone, piperitone oxide, menthone, isomenthone, and pulegone. The composition of M. spicata EOS from Morocco is relatively stable and has strong homogeneity. No significant difference between samples was observed; whatever the locality (region), the main essential oil compounds are carvone and trans-carveol, showing variation in a narrow range of 29–47.3% and 14–20%, respectively. Various chemotypes of M. spicata were also identified for plants cultivated in Italy and Turkey. In plants from Italy, carvone (39.13–59.26%) was detected as the main compound, while for the species from Turkey, piperitenone oxide (25.84%), pulegone (24.72%), cis-piperitenone oxide (12.55%), and limonene 1.59% were the principal constituents of the EOS. It is worth noting that chemotype carvone represented the most variation, 79.70% in spearmint M. spicata EOS. Other examples of M. spicata producing EOs with high piperitone oxide content (above 70%) are samples from India. As established in the literature, such compound is one of the most abundant components of M. spicata EO, which offers spearmint its unique smooth characteristic scent, and it also varies according to the spearmint oil grown in different countries. Similarly, EOs from Cyprus is reported to possess a higher carvone content (69.23–74.27%).

However, four chemotypes of M. spicata were found in Brazil, characterized by the dominant occurrence of carvone which vary from 39.42% to 72.28% and piperitone presented high level 81.18%, Although carvone was constantly present as a chief component among spearmint species, there was one landrace with linalool content up to 58.51%. Since all the studies were carried out in the same environmental conditions, this variation may be triggered by their different genetic backgrounds, having evolved due to complex geographic-environmental differences across Brazil. Interestingly, in most M. spicata EOs, carvone is the major constituent, notably found in quantities above 50% in EOs extracted from plants cultivated in Hungary, Iran, Bangladesh, Serbia, Czech Republic, and Pakistan.

Furthermore, the occurrence of huge chemical variations among Mentha accessions collected from diverse countries seems to be due to the divergent climatological and geographical conditions; existing variations in oil content and composition may be attributed to factors related to ecotype and the environment including temperature, relative humidity, irradiance, and photoperiod. Additionally, the reported yields of carvone for M. spicata range from 39.21% to 75.53%, being the highest value found for plants cultivated in Tunisia.

As given in Table 2, plants cultivated in several states in Iran usually produce EOs with high (>50%) 1,8-cineole content. Similarly, M. spicata populations in China also show certain stability in essential oils, with carvone chemotype affording high yield 46.7–65.4% above, while dihydrocarveol acetate (0.2–7%) observed in Chinese spearmint is the only oxygenated sesquiterpenes. Also, a large chemical variability is observed among M. spicata essential oil extracted by different methods. Such variation can be attributed to several factors, including genetic, environmental, and their interaction effects, such as plant part, harvest time, extraction method, ecotype, and geographic origin (climate, edaphic, elevation, and topography).

M. spicata has a broad spectrum of bioactive compounds; preliminary screening of M. spicata revealed the presence of polyphenols, flavonoids, tannins, sterols, triterpenes, and glycosides. Besides, the chemical composition of M. spicata methanolic extracts harvested from different regions of India confirmed the presence of alcohols, phenols, alkanes, alkenes, carbonyl, carboxylic acids, and aromatic compounds. Besides, Bimakr et al. identified the flavonoid content from M. spicata leaves by using conventional Soxhlet extraction (CSE) and supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO2) extraction. The highest content was obtained with methanol solvent, which extracted seven flavonoids. The highest recovery was recorded for the free aglycone apigenin 27–39.2%, followed by naringenin 5.4–24.9%, epicatechin 15.6–16.3%, catechin 14–14.4%, rutin 14.8–16.1%, myricetin 4.1–11.7%, and luteolin 9.3–65.7% (Figure 2 and Table 2); the same study also identified apigenin as the major isolated flavonoid (6.14 ± 0.76%) from ethanolic and hydroethanolic fractions. Interestingly, supercritical carbon dioxide extract was found to have more main flavonoid compounds and high recovery comparing to the 70% ethanol Soxhlet extraction.

The ethanolic extracts of M. spicata contain a large amount of phenolic compounds (polyphenols, flavonoids, and caffeic acid derivatives); ferulic acid was determined in the highest concentration (27.32%), followed by p-coumaric acid (15.24%) and sinapic acid (6.60%). Caftaric acid, caffeic acid, and chlorogenic acid were also identified in low quantities (Figure 2). In addition, luteolin was identified and quantified (4.68%) in M. spicata extract (Figure 2, Table 2). For fatty acids composition, the EOs produced by M. spicata are the most widely investigated among all Mentha species. Alpha-linolenic acid (48.17%) has been found to be the major polyunsaturated fatty acid of M. spicata. Linoleic acid (31.14%) is the second major polyunsaturated fatty acid in the present study. In comparison, oleic acid (8.19%) and palmitic acid (5.11%) are determined as the major monounsaturated fatty acids, stearidonic acid (3.02%), γ-linolenic acid (2.07%), and stearic acid (1.92%) (Figure 3, Table 2). Various phytosterols including ergosterol (51.42%), stigmasterol (7.6%), and beta-sitosterol (2.86%) (Figure 4) have been found in M. spicata. Moreover, M. spicata contains r-tocopherol (6.11%) and vitamin D3 (31.74%) as lipide-soluble vitamins (Table 2). On the other hand, naringenin (55.44%), naringin (25%), and quercetin (19.38%) have been identified as the major flavonoids in the seeds of M. spicata; while, myricetin and catechin constituents are not detected (Figure 5 and Table 2). Polar extracts of spearmint leaves are characterized mainly by a high content of phenolic compounds; the sum of rosmarinic acid and its derivatives was about 88% of the total amount of detected phenolics, followed by salvianolic acids (5.6%) and caffeoylquinic acids (1.2%). Hydroxycinnamic acids, including caftaric acid, represented about 1.1% of total phenolics. All other detected phenolic groups, such as flavonols, flavanones, flavones, hydroxybenzoic acids, and hydroxyphenyl propanoic acids, represented approximately 1%.

3.4. Mineral and Heavy Metal Contents

Mint tea may be an important source of macro and micrometallic elements, which are essential for human health. However, literature reflects enormous variability in determined concentrations. Indeed, Subramanian et al. revealed that total metal concentrations of Fe, Na, Mg, Mn, Pb, Cd, Cu, and Zn in Mentha spicata were 395.74 ± 4.09 mg/kg, 808.09 ± 1.64 mg/kg, 532.72 ± 0.93 mg/kg, 85.72 ± 1.13 mg/kg, 9.89 ± 0.36 mg/kg, 0.74 ± 0.07 mg/kg, 29.83 ± 3.16 mg/kg, and 49.76 ± 4.12 mg/kg, respectively. In another study, Choudhury et al. analyzed ten Mentha spicata leaves samples collected from four different locations in Northwest India for minor and trace elements including heavy toxic metals using thermal neutron activation analysis (TNAA) and atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS). The authors revealed that the most elements were found in widely varying amounts depending on the location: Na (0.21–0.86 mg/g), K(12.4–53.3 mg/g), and Ca (5.82–16.8 mg/g); whereas, mean contents of other nutrient elements in mint were as follows: Fe (108 ± 22 μg/g), Mg (4.83 ± 0.92 mg/g), Mn (53.5 ± 9.6 μg/g), P (3.88 ± 0.94 mg/g), Cu (16.9 ± 1.8 μg/g), Zn (21.0 ± 4.7 μg/g), and Se (0.18 ± 0.03 μg/g). The toxic heavy metals such as Hg (97–983 ng/g), Sb (1.8–315 ng/g), Ni (0.37–3.22 ng/g), Cd (15–772 ng/g), and As (98–320 ng/g) are all found at ng/g level only but vary in a wide range. Moreover, aerial parts M. spicata from Iran contains 129.76 μg/g of Fe, 8.52 μg/g of Zn, and 6.8 μg/g of Mn.

3.5. Pharmacological Properties of M. spicata

M. spicata essential oils and extracts exhibit different biological and pharmacological properties (Figure 6). These properties will be discussed in the following sections.

3.5.1. Antifungal Activity

Several studies investigated the antifungal activity of Mentha spicata extracts using different parts of the plant and different methods such as the disc diffusion method, microdilution method, agar well diffusion method, spots method, and microdilution broth susceptibility assay

Table 3 provides all studies that examined the antifungal potential of M. spicata extracts, showing the type of extract, plant part used, used method, tested strains, and key results. Using the disc diffusion method, Alaklabi et al. assessed the antifungal activity of hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, methanol, ethanol, toluene, n-butanol, n-propanol, isopropanol, and water extracts from the root of M. spicata against Aspergillus niger, Candida albicans, Cryptococcus neoformans, and Microsporum audouinii. Water extract showed the highest activity against M. audouinii (MIC: 16 μg/mL). It revealed a remarkable antifungal response against other fungal species, A. niger (MIC = 32 μg/mL), C. albicans (MIC = 64 μg/mL), and C. neoformans (MIC = 32 μg/mL). Hexane, chloroform, and ethyl acetate extracts exhibited high antifungal activity against M. audouinii with a MIC equal to 32 μg/mL, 64 μg/mL, and 32 μg/mL, respectively. In contrast, the same extracts did not show a significant effect against the other fungal strains tested. Moreover, C. albicans was significantly inhibited by toluene and n-butanol extracts (MIC = 64 μg/mL), whereas the fungal activity of A. niger was highly reduced by using methanol and ethanol extracts (MIC = 64 μg/mL). Using the same method to screen the antifungal activity of M. spicata root extracts, isopropanol extract was found to be less active for the four fungal strains evaluated.

To investigate the antifungal properties of essential oil isolated from the aerial parts of M. spicata cultivated in the Algerian Saharan Atlas, the results published by Bardaweel et al. showed a lower activity of essential oil of M. spicata against Candida glabrata (MIC = 256 μg/mL) by employing the microdilution method. Nevertheless, in the Turkish study conducted by Bayan et al., the volatile oil from M. spicata extracted of aerial parts exhibited a strong fungitoxicity effect with 100% of inhibition of mycelium growth in F. oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici (FORL), Verticillium dahliae Kleb (V. dahliae), Alternaria solani (A. solani), and Rhizoctonia solani J.G. Kühn. (R. solani) at a dose of 12 μL petri−1 by using the agar well diffusion method.

In another study from Pakistan, Hussain et al.evaluated the antifungal activity of essential oil of spearmint (Mentha spicata L.) isolated from dried aerial parts against five fungal strains. The results showed that Aspergillus niger was the most responsive fungal species presenting the largest zone of inhibition (26.9 mm) with the MIC value of 0.07 mg/mL, followed by Mucor mucedo (Ф = 26.2 ± 0.8 mm and MIC = 0.08 ± 0.00 μg/mL), Rhizopus solani (Ф = 26.3 ± 0.8 mm and MIC = 0.09 ± 0.00 μg/mL), and Fusarium solani (Ф = 25.2 ± 1.0 mm and MIC = 0.09 ± 0.00 μg/mL). However, B. theobromae was observed to be the most resistant fungus with the smallest inhibition zone (23.0 mm) and a MIC value equal to 0.11 mg/mL by using microdilution broth susceptibility assay.

Additionally, Kedia et al. tested the antifungal potency of essential oil of spearmint against 19 food-deteriorating molds using the poisoned food assay. The fundings showed that the oil of M. spicata has a notable potential to inhibit the fungal growth of all fungi species, causing 100% of mycelial inhibition at 1.0 μL ml−1 excluding Aspergillus luchuensis and Aspergillus terreus, where the percentage of mycelial inhibition was 91.72 ± 0.36% and 75.67 ± 0.74%, respectively. The results of testing the nature toxicity of the oil from M. spicata revealed that spearmint essential oil possessed a fungicidal effect in Cladosporium cladosporioides, Mycelia sterilia, Alternaria alternata, and Curvularia lunata at 1.0 μL mL−1. In their study, Liu et al. investigated the biological properties of the essential oil isolated from aerial parts of M. spicata from China. Using the disc diffusion method, the results of this study showed quite strong antifungal potency against A. niger with an MIC value of 6.25 μg/mL and an MBC value of 12.50 μg/mL. Compared to a study carried out by Şarer et al. from eastern Turkey, the oil of M. spicata subsp. spicata exhibited high antifungal activity against Candida albicans and Candida tropicalis with an MIC value less than 3.19 μg/mL.

Regarding testing the potential antimicrobial effects of M. spicata, investigated the essential oil extracted from air-dried leaves of Algerian spearmint against Candida albicans (ATCC 1024) strain and two Aspergillus species (flavus NRRL 391 and niger 2CA 936). Using the spots method, their finding indicates that Candida albicans (ATCC 1024) was the most sensitive species with a diameter of growth inhibition zones equal to 44.3 ± 1.1 mm, followed by A. flavus NRRL 391 (Ф = 43.7 ± 0.6 mm), and A. niger 2CA 936 (Ф = 36.0 ± 1.0 mm). The disc diffusion method also showed high activity against Aspergillus species, A. flavus NRRL 391 (Ф = 36.0 ± 2.0 mm) and A. niger 2CA 936 (Ф = 32.0 ± 1.0 mm) than C. albicans (ATCC 1024) (Ф = 23.3 ± 0.6 mm).

On the other hand, Ojewumi et al. demonstrated the antimicrobial role of the leaf oil extract of M. spicata from Nigeria by using two types of petroleum ether and hexane extract. They found that the hexane extract showed higher activity against Aspergillus niger (Ф = 26 mm) followed by Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Ф = 25). In addition, they observed that petroleum ether extract showed potent activity against Aspergillus niger (Ф = 27 mm) followed by S. cerevisiae (Ф = 27). Therefore, it was noted that the effectiveness of the two extracts was significantly comparable as the inhibitory zone values are very similar. Furthermore, the ethanolic extract exhibited 100% of inhibition against Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lentis in the investigation performed by Singh et al. that aimed to study the antifungal activity of M. spicata. The results found were supported by the study conducted in Sudan by Sulieman et al.; they indicated that spearmint oil leaves have demonstrated potent activity against Aspergillus niger (ATCC 9763) with an inhibition zone equal to 19 mm at a high concentration (20%) and (15 mm) at low concentration (5%). In addition, the oil of M. spicata exhibited considerable inhibition capacity against C. albicans with an inhibition zone diameter of 18 mm at higher concentration (20%) and 14 mm at lower concentration (5%). Similarly, the concentration of 100 mg/mL was able to inhibit C. albicans with a diameter of growth inhibition zone reached 16 mm using the agar diffusion method.

Zaidi et al. evaluated the antifungal efficiency of oil leaves from M. spicata against four fungal species including A. niger and Aspergillus spp., C. albicans, and Rhizopus nigricans, using the agar well diffusion method. The results showed that Mentha spicata oil exhibited an excellent potential against fungal strains tested but with differing sensitivity. A. niger showed a strong inhibition zone of 15.7 ± 0.09 mm compared to C. albicans, which possessed an inhibition zone of 11.8 ± 0.10 mm. However, M. spicata oil was not able to inhibit the growth of R. nigricans strain. The oil also exhibited an antifungal effect against Aspergillus spp. (13 ± 0.13 mm). In another study, using the agar well diffusion method, essential oil isolated from spearmint was observed to act as a stronger bioactive source against fungal species with a different zone of inhibition. Indeed, inhibition zone diameters for Aspergillus ochraceus (NRRL 3174) (Ф = 43 mm) and Mucor ramamnianus (ATCC 9314) (Ф = 40 mm) were higher than inhibition zone diameters for S. cerevisiae (ATCC 4226 A) (Ф = 25 mm) and C. albicans IPA 200 (Ф = 21 mm).
3.5.2. Antibacterial Activity

For over 60 years, antimicrobial agents have been used to treat infections in humans, animals, and plants. Currently, they are among the most widely used therapeutic agents in human and veterinary medicine. At the start of antibiotic therapy, as resistant strains were low and highly effective antimicrobial agents of different classes were detected, antimicrobial resistance was not considered a major problem. This has forced sensitive bacteria living in close contact with antimicrobial producers to develop mechanisms to bypass the inhibitory effects of antimicrobial agents (Table 4). In the context of this study, several in vitro studies have determined the antibacterial activity of M. spicata essential oils and solvent extracts against various bacterial strains, either clinical or reference, using the agar diffusion methods (disks or well) and the agar and broth dilution methods. In most of these studies, qualitative inhibition was determined by the dilution method, which is used to assess minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) values. Indeed, the increased selective pressure imposed by the widespread use of antimicrobial agents has clearly accelerated the development and spread of bacterial resistance to antimicrobial agents. These observations underscore the enormous flexibility of bacteria to resist less favorable environmental conditions by constantly developing new survival strategies.
