How to Grow and Care for Mentha (Mint)

Mint species (Mentha spp.) are very hardy perennials that are simple to identify not just because of their fresh and spicy scent but because all members of the mint genus have opposite leaves and square stems. Long stems grow upward, flop over, and roots will form where the stems touch the soil enabling the mint plant to spread quite aggressively. Its small white or purple summer-blooming flowers attract bees, butterflies, and other pollinators. Mint plants grow quickly and should be planted in the spring after the threat of frost has passed. Mint is toxic to animals if it is ingested.


----------------------------
Common Name: Mint
Botanical Name: Mentha spp.
Family: Lamiaceae
Plant Type: Perennial, herb
Size: 12–18 in. tall, 18–24 in. wide
Sun Exposure: Full, partial
Soil Type: Loamy, moist, well-drained
Soil pH: Acidic, neutral
Bloom Time: Summer
Hardiness Zones: 3–11, USA (depends on species)
Native Area: North America, Africa, Australia
Toxicity: Toxic to animals
----------------------------

How to Plant Mint

Because mint is an aggressive spreader, keep it separated from your regular garden beds or the plants will consume nutrients and overgrow other plants in the bed. Growing mint in containers is recommended to keep it contained from spreading rampantly to other areas of your garden. If you plant mint in pathway crevices and between rocky places in high traffic areas, the mint will release its aromatic scent whenever the leaves are stepped on and crushed.

When to Plant
Plant mint outdoors in the spring after the threat of frost has passed. Mint will benefit from springtime rainfall.
Selecting a Planting Site

When planting mint in the ground, choose a place where it can spread without causing any problems. Mint fares best in a damp, moist area with well-draining soil, but also in a spot that's in either full sun or part shade. The plant favors fertile soil enriched with compost.

Spacing, Depth, and Support
Plant cuttings or small purchased plants 18 inches to two feet apart outdoors. Two plants should be enough to cover a few feet of ground because it grows aggressively. Mint has a shallow root system so you won't have to dig down too far, just enough to gently lay the plant and spread its roots.

Your primary maintenance task with mint might be to trim back your plant to prevent its runners from spreading to unwanted places. To further discourage spreading, edge the area where you plant mint with edging that is placed 18 to 24 inches deep into the soil or grow it in a container.


Mint Plant Care

Light
Mint plants prefer part shade, though they will grow in full sun if you water them frequently. Still, it's best to protect them from strong afternoon sun. Mint also can survive in fairly shady conditions, though it might be leggy and not produce as many or as flavorful of leaves.

Soil
Mint can adapt to most soil types, but it prefers a rich soil with a slightly acidic to neutral pH. Good soil drainage also is essential. Mint plants like water, but waterlogged soil can rot their roots.

Water
Water your mint during dry spells to keep the soil lightly moist. Maintaining lightly moist but not soggy soil is the ideal environment for mint. If the soil feels dry about an inch down, give your plant some water. If you notice the foliage of your mint wilting, that's typically a sign the plant needs more moisture. It's best to water your mint in the morning so it has plenty of moisture during the day as temperatures rise.

Temperature and Humidity
Temperature tolerance depends on the species you are growing, but in general, mint plants are widely adaptable. For example, peppermint (Mentha piperita) is very cold hardy and is able to tolerate the cool temperatures in USDA hardiness zone 3. Spearmint (Mentha spicata) handles the heat well and can grow in USDA hardiness zone 11.

Mint plants might struggle in low humidity. If you are growing your mint indoors, increase humidity by misting the plant between waterings or set the container on a water-filled tray of pebbles. This is especially necessary during the dry winter months.

Fertilizer
Feed mint plants during the growing season (spring to fall) if you have nutrient-poor soil. If you already have rich garden soil, you likely won't have to give your mint any supplemental fertilizer. Container-grown plants and plants grown in nutrient-poor soil will benefit from feeding with a balanced, all-purpose fertilizer throughout the growing season, starting in spring when the plants emerge. Follow label instructions. 