Peepal tree health benefits and leaves uses (Ficus religiosa)

Peepal tree or Ficus religiosa is a large fast-growing deciduous tree growing up to 70-90 feet in height with spreading branches. In this post, we will talk about Peepal tree health benefits and leaves uses.

The stem of the Peepal tree attains a girth of 12-15 feet and remains buttressed near the base. It is cylindrical as we go up. Leaves are pendulous, broadly ovate, very long caudate, and margin often repand.

The dark green, shining leaves are coriaceous, base coardate or truncate with 3 principal nerves and 2-4 weaker ones. Flowers remain hidden with the figs. The figs are like berries and ripen in May. They are axillary, geminate, sessile, and depressed-globose and have a dark purple colour when ripe.

Peepal tree benefits and medicinal uses (Ficus religiosa)

Ficus religiosa common names in different languages
The common name is Peepal or Pipal tree, Ashwattha, Bo, Jari, Ragi, Bodhidruma, and Rukka Arayal.

Scientific name: Ficus religiosa
Sanskrit: Ashwatha, Ashvatha, Pippala, Acriyutavas, Bodhidruma, Chaityadru, Chaityavriksha, Chaladala, Chalapatra, Kshiradruma, Mangalya, Nagabandhu, Pavitraka, Pippala, Sevya, Shuchidruma, Shymala, Vipra, Vishala, Vriksha Raja
Assamese: Ahant
Bengali: Asvattha, Ashud, Ashvattha
English: Pipal tree, Peepal tree, Sacred fig, Sacred Ficus
Gujrati: Piplo, Jari, Piparo, Pipalo
Hindi: Pipala, Pipal, pipli, pipar, Peepul
Kannada: Arlo, Ranji, Basri, Ashvatthanara, Ashwatha, Ashwattha, Aralimara, Aralegida, Brahmadaru
Malayalam: Arayal, Ashwatham, Bodhivriksham
Marathi: Pipal, Pimpal, Pippal
Oriya: Aswatha
Punjabi: Pipal, Pippal
Tamil: Ashwarthan, Arasamaram, Arasan, Arasu, Arara, Achuvattam
Telugu: Ravichettu
Sinhalese: Bo gaha
Peepal tree scientific name and Family
The botanical name is Ficus religiosa. It belongs to the Moraceae that is the fig or mulberry family.

Geological places where Peepal tree grows
It is a native to the Indian subcontinent and is grown throughout the country but is mainly found in the Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, rajasthan and Kerala. It thrives in hot, humid conditions.

Peepal tree medicinal uses and health benefits
Every part of the Peepal tree has some medicinal value. The tree is the abode of all the gods and remains sacred in India. In traditional medicine, it helps cure 50 types of diseases and ailments.

1. Ficus religiosa is Good for Diabetes
Those who are 50 years and above will have sugar complaint. You can manage your sugar levels by taking the juice of the leaves (or root if you want something stronger). Crush the leaves or the roots and boil it in water. Have this thrice a day to help control the sugar in the blood. Find diabetes home remedies.

Peepal leaves and fruit

2. Helps in treating fevers and colds
You can get relief from cold and fever with the Peepal leaves. This is due to the purgative action of the leaves. Plus, they act as a tonic. Take the tender leaves of the peepal tree and boil them in milk. Have a glass of this milk every morning and evening. You get immediate relief from fever and cold.

3. Peepal leaf is good for treating jaundice
When your liver remains affected and you have jaundice, you must have the decoction of the seeds in water three times a day. This will help control the symptoms and make you well again. (Find natural remedies for jaundice)

4. Prevent rheumatic pain
Rheumatic pain comes due to swelling of the joints. This is an old age disease that occurs because the fluids in the joints dry up. You can treat this condition easily with the paste of the leaves of the Peepal tree. Apply the paste morning and night for best relief.

5. Improve fertility
You can treat many disorders involving your sexual life with the Peepal tree leaves and bark. Boil some of the crushed leaves and powdered bark in milk. Have this milk twice a day for full stimulation and happy sexual life. Find Foods to improve fertility in male and female.

6. Treat skin conditions
You can treat many skin conditions such as psoriasis and eczema using the paste of the leaves. Apply the paste of the leaves on the affected areas and leave it on for half an hour.

Then you can wash it with warm water. Do this regularly morning and night for two weeks, and you will notice a difference! Read about eczema natural treatment.

7. Ficus religiosa tree is Good for asthma
When people have trouble with their breathing due to asthma, the juice of the Peepal tree leaves provides good relief. It helps stimulate the bronchial muscle by stimulating them and clears the airways and thus helping them to have a better airflow. Read natural chronic asthma relief method.

8. An antidote for poisoning
Use the juice of the roots as an emetic. Apply the paste of the leaves on the skin where the snake has bitten to cure it.

9. Antimicrobial properties
The Peepal tree leaves showed good fighting quality against bacteria and fungi such as Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Aspergillus Niger,Candida albicans, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

10. Health tonic
Use the decoction of the leaves and bark as a health tonic. Drink one glass of the decoction morning and evening to improve your health. You can give the decoction to growing children to improve their health.

11. The bark is cooling
Drink the decoction of the dried bark of the Peepal tree to get a cooling effect for the body. This is especially useful during the summer time when the body becomes very hot.

12. Relieve constipation
Get relief from constipation by drinking the decoction of the roots of the Ficus religiosa tree. It will improve the bowel movement and help augment the digestion. By this, the person will become invigorated and get brisker in his or her work.

13. Treat heart disease
Having the preparation of the Ficus religiosa tree will improve the heart health. It does this by lowering the cholesterol levels and decreasing the blood pressure. It dilates the blood vessels, so the tension eases. The heart health improves by the improved health conditions.

14. Helps relieve eye pain
If you develop eye pain, it is easy to get relief using Peepal leaves. Crush some leaves and develop the milk from the leaves of the pipal tree or plant.

15. The bark is astringent
Boil some dried bark in water and use the cooled water for treating skin ailments. It makes the skin become youthful and opens the pores. You can also drink the water to get a good effect.

16. Relief from dysentery
If you have a loose motion and need relief, try the decoction made from the dried bark of the Ficus religiosa tree. Drink this in the morning and the evening, until dysentery stops.

17. Good for ear infections
You can cure all infections of the ear by the extract of the Peepal tree. Pour the juice of the leaves in both ears and wait for a while. Wash it with warm water. Do this every morning for one week.

18. Relieve a toothache
Crush the leaves and keep it next to the gums where you have a toothache. Remove when you have your meals. Then, again crush some leaves and keep it near the aching tooth.

19. Heal superficial wounds
Apply the paste of the leaves on the region where you have the bruises. This will cure the bruises fast.

20. Good anti-convulsion properties
People who have convulsions will benefit by the use of the Peepal tree. Use the juice of the roots for treating the convulsions. Have the juice morning and evening until you get relief.

