Ficus religiosa: A wholesome medicinal tree

Abstract Medicinal plants play a vital role in improving health of people. Hundreds of medicinal plants have been used to cure various diseases since ancient times. Ficus religiosa (Peepal) has an important place among herbal plants. Almost every part of this tree i.e. leaves, bark, seeds and fruits are used in the preparation of  herbal  medicines. Therapeutic  properties  of  this tree  in  curing  a  wide  range  of  diseases  can  be attributed to its richness in bioactive compounds namely flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, saponins, phenols etc. Its  antimicrobial,  anti-diabetic,  anticonvulsant,  wound  healing,  anti-inflammatory  and  analgesic properties have made it a popular herbal tree and its parts are placed as important ingredient in modern pharmacological industry. The documentation of traditional and modern usage of F. religiosa under one heading can help researchers to design and develop new functional foods from F. religiosa.  Keywords: Ficus religiosa, bioactive compounds, nutritional composition, medicinal properties  Introduction Genus  Ficus  has 750  species  of  woody  plants, from  which  Ficus religiosa  is  one of  the important and usable species (Sharma et al., 2016) [44] and (Joseph and Raj, 2010)  [30]. Ficus religiosa, commonly known as peepal is one of the oldest trees in Indian literature (Singh et al., 2015) [46] and (Gautam et al., 2014) [12]. Its existence can be traced back to the Indus valley civilization (300 BC – 1700 BC) where it was embarked on the currency of that time (Pandey and Pandey, 2016) [39]. The tree finds its documentation in the holy books of Hinduism such as Arthasastra, Puranas, Upanishads, Ramayana, Mahabharata, Bhagavad Geeta and Buddhistic literature. It belongs to family Moraceae and genus Ficus. It derived its botanical name from two words i.e.  ‘Ficus’ a Latin word for ‘fig’ and ‘Religiosa’ refers  to  ‘religion’ indicating its importance in Hindu  and Buddhist  religions (Bhalerao  and Sharma, 2014)  [4]. The  detailed classification of tree has been presented in Table 1. The tree is native to India and is believed to originate mainly in Northern and Eastern India. It is also found in its neighboring countries like Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri- Lanka and China. F. religiosa is known by more than 150 names (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4]  and some of the common names of F.  religiosa have  been discussed  in  Table 2.  Even  in  India,  it  has various  names  in different  regions according to their languages such as Peepal in  Hindi, Ashwatha in Sankrit (Gautam  et al., 2014) [12]. A detailed list of Indian names of Peepal has been provided in Table 3. Because  of  its  contribution  in  historical  events  it  has  an  important  place  in  medicinal, mythological and religious systems of India and hence this tree is mostly seen near religious places (Rutuja et al., 2015) [43]. The tree grows very large in size with wide spreading branches and brown colored bark. It has thin shiny leaves and the fruit is compressed and circular in shape. New immature leaves are red pinkish in color which turns into deep green at the stage of  maturity  (Panchawat,  2012)  [38].  Flowering  occurs  in  February,  onset of  fruits  start  in summers and  ripening is  complete before the  onset of  rainy season (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4]. Fruits grow in pairs together to form a single mass. Immature fruits are green in color which changes to blackish purple after ripening (Dharmender et al., 2010) [10]. All parts of  this tree are rich in  phytochemicals and are  used in various  food and medicinal preparations. The ripe fruits of F. religiosa are edible and rich source of proteins and minerals (Ruby et  al., 2000) [42] and (Verma et al., 2015) [48].  Fruits are rich in phytochemicals like flavonoids,  terpenoids, glycosides  etc.  which are  known  to cure  diseases  like  asthma and digestive  disorders (Makhija  et al.,  2010)  [35]. The  leaves contain  phytochemicals such  as flavonoids,  terpenoids,  tannins  etc.,  which  are  effective  in  curing  ailments  like  hiccups, vomiting, gonorrhea etc. (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4]. The bark contains phytochemicals like tannins, saponins, flavonoids etc. which show beneficial effects in health conditions such as diarrhea, dysentery, inflammation,  bacterial infections, bleeding and paralysis (Singh  and Jaiswal, 2014) [47]. 
Other uses of Ficus religiosa F. religiosa is being used to cure various infections and food poisonings.  The  bark is  used  to  cure  skin  diseases,  mouth ulcers,  diabetes  and  bone  fracture.  Leaves  are  used  in conditions  like  vomiting,  gonorrhea  etc.  these  can  also  be consumed  in  the  form  of  juice  in  conditions  like  asthma, cough, diarrhea, gastric problems. Shoots are used in treating skin problems (Singh and Jaiswal, 2014) [47]. Stem can be used in  treatment of  urinary disorders  and problems of  digestive system. The dried powder of fruits has been used in treatment of  respiratory problems  like  asthma  (Panchawat,  2014)  [38]. Many  present  day herbal  medicines  contain  parts of  Ficus religiosa as  an ingredient.  Different parts  can be  consumed 
either in raw form (powder, extract) or in form of indigenous medicines (either  alone or  in combination with other herbs) for specific ailments.   Herbal remedies of Ficus religiosa  F. religiosa is a traditional religious plant in India and is used in  treatment  of  several  health  ailments  as  a  home  based remedy  either  singly  or  in  combination  with  other  herbs (Herry,  2016)  [16].  It  has  been  traditionally  used  in  the treatment  of  heart  ailments,  nose  bleeding,  diabetes, constipation, fever, jaundice  etc. Detailed  account of  herbal remedies has been given in Table 6.
