Some Ayurvedic Facts of Peepal Tree With Leaves

Introduction:-
It's mainly known as Bodhi tree. The Peepal tree(Ficus religiosa) is a perennial evergreen tree grown all over India. But for the most part, is grown in Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Haryana and is also found in Ranthambore National Park in India. It is easy to grow with seeds, sandy loam soil, and bright indirect sunlight in a pot. When it will germinate, then transfer to an open space like a park or garden. The Peepal tree is a long-lived evergreen tree, and it's not released oxygen, but its composition is also used in Unani and Ayurvedic medicines to treat many health issues. The “Asvattha” bark is founded to treat jaundice, ulcers, gonorrhea, and another skin disease. It is useful in treating glandular swelling in the neck and inflammations. It is considered favorable in Jainism, and Hinduism and Buddhism come from insight under the vernacular Broadleaf trees of India. In the report of Hindu myths, Lord Shiva lives in the Peepal tree’s leave, Lord Vishnu lives in the Peepal tree’s trunk, Gautam Budh was do meditation under the Peepal’s tree and Lord Brahma lives in the Peepal tree’s root. The Peepal tree is large with broadly expanding branches that grown from India to southeastern Asia and its frequent growth as an epiphytic plant. It has different parts like stem bark, leaves, root bark, and fruits are used to prevent causes of constipation, blood sugar, and asthma. Peepal should not allow growing at home. If it grows naturally should be uprooted and grow to another location outside of the house like the temple, garden, or holy location.

You can also try to know about the Heath Benefits of Fenugreek seeds with leaves

Benefits and uses of Peepal tree
For Asthma

The bark of the Peepal tree and fruits are treated to asthma. Make a powder of bark and fruits within equal quantities and consumed it thrice a day to relieve asthma. And another way to ease asthma take Peepal fruit powdered twice a day for 14 days to relieve.
For poor appetite

Eating ripe fruit of the Peepal tree is also known as” sacred fig” to treat poor appetite and also burning sensation in the stomach.
For stomach pain

It comes to treating stomach illness. You can make tablets of Peepal leaves and jaggery to ease the stomachache.
For eczema and itching

By consuming Peepal bark tea is used to treat eczema and itching. You can also try to apply the paste of ash of Peepal leaves/bark, ghee, and lemon to the affected areas.
For a brighter complexion

Make a face pack, powder of Peepal tree bark, and gram flour to treat the skin complexion. Peepal trees and Banyan trees are also used for many Ayurvedic beauty treatments.
For cracked heels

Apply the extract of milk and leaves of Peepal tree to treat cracked heels, It will make heels smooth and soft.
For toothache

Use rinse boiling water of Peepal tree bark and Banyan tree bark in equal quantities to relieve toothache.
For constipation

It is a great way to get ease from constipation, If you eat 4-6 figs of Peepal tree fruit (sacred fig) in your daily diet. It will go far away permanently.
Conclusion:-
In short, the Peepal is a sacred tree and is worshiped by Indians, and all parts of the tree are miraculous It is grown in India and is easy to find anywhere in humid and hot weather with some health benefits. Ficus religiosa (peepal tree) has a major place in the herbal plants with some medicinal properties to cure some diseases. So you can use Peepal tree fruits, bark, and leaves in your daily life for fitness.