Phytochemistry and Pharmacological properties of Ficus religiosa: an overview

Inder Kumar Makhija*, Indra Prakash Sharma, Devang Khamar
Department of Pharmacognosy, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal
University, Manipal, Karnataka, India

Ethnopharmacology
Traditional Uses
F. religiosa is a well known ethnomedicinal tree used in Ayurveda. Its use in the Indian
traditional folk medicine also well documented. The use of different parts of F. religiosa in
traditional system of medicine (Table 1). 
Morphology and microscopy
Morphology: F. religiosa is a large deciduous tree with few or no aerial roots. It is often
epiphytic with the drooping branches bearing long petioled, ovate, cordate shiny leaves. Leaves
are bright green, the apex produced into a linear-lanceolate tail about half as long as the main
portion of the blade. The receptacles occurring in pairs and are axillary, depressed globose,
smooth and purplish when ripe. The bark is flat or slightly curved, varying from 5 to 8 mm in
thickness, outer surface is grey or ash with thin or membranous flakes and is often covered with
crustose lichen brown or ash coloured, surface has shallow irregular vertical fissures and uneven
due to exfoliation of cork, inner surface smooth, yellowish to orange brown and fibrous [7,13].
Microscopy: An external features of bark of F. religiosa showed that bark differentiated into
outer thick periderm and inner secondary phloem. Periderm is differentiated into phellem and
phelloderm. Phellem zone is 360 mm thick and it is wavy and uneven in transection. Phellem
cells are organized into thin tangential membranous layers and the older layers exfoliate in the
form of thin membranes. The phelloderm zone is broad and distinct. Phelloderm cells are turned
into lignified sclereids. Secondary phloem differentiated into inner narrow non-collapsed zone
and outer broad collapsed zone. Non-collapsed zone consists of radial files of sieve tube
members, axial parenchyma, and gelatinous fibres. Outer collapsed phloem has dilated rays,
crushed obliterated sieve tube members, thick walled and lignified fibres, and abundant tannin
filled parenchyma cells. Laticifers are fairly abundant in the outer secondary phloem zone.
Phloem rays are both uniseriate and multiseriate. Multiseriate rays are homocellular and
uniseriate rays are either homocellular or heterocellular [13].
Physical constants: Total ash 7.86 % w/w, acid insoluble ash 0.41 % w/w, alcohol soluble
extract 7.21 % w/w and water soluble extractive 15.76 % w/w [13].
Phytochemistry
Preliminary phytochemical screening of F. religiosa barks, showed the presence tannins,
saponins, flavonoids, steroids, terpenoids and cardiac glycosides [13,14]. The barks of F.
religiosa showed the presence of bergapten, bergaptol, lanosterol, β-sitosterol, stigmasterol,
lupen-3-one, β-sitosterol-d-glucoside (phytosterolin), vitamin k1[15-18]. The bark also contains
tannin, wax, saponin, β-sitosterol, leucocyanidin-3-0-β-D-glucopyrancoside, leucopelargonidin3-0-β-D-glucopyranoside, leucopelargonidin-3-0-α-L- rhamnopyranoside, lupeol, ceryl behenate,
lupeol acetate, α-amyrin acetate, leucoanthocyanidin and leucoanthocyanin [19]. Leaves yield
campestrol, stigmasterol, isofucosterol, α-amyrin, lupeol, tannic acid, arginine, serine, aspartic
acid, glycine, threonine, alanine, proline, tryptophan, tryosine, methionine, valine, isoleucine,
leucine, n-nonacosane, n-hentricontanen, hexa-cosanol and n-octacosan [20-22]. The fruit of F.
religiosa contains asgaragine, tyrosine, undecane, tridecane, tetradecane, (e)-β-ocimene, αthujene, α-pinene, β-pinene, α-terpinene, limonene, dendrolasine, dendrolasine α-ylangene, αcopaene, β-bourbonene, β-caryophyllene, α-trans bergamotene, aromadendrene, α-humulene,
alloaromadendrene, germacrene, bicyclogermacrene, γ-cadinene and δ-cadinene [23]. Alanine,
threonine, tyrosine have been reported in seeds of F. religiosa [24]. The crude latex of F.
religiosa shows the presence of a serine protease, named religiosin. Religiosin is an acidic
Analgesic activity: Sreelekshmi et al. investigated the analgesic activity of the F. religiosa stem
bark methanolic extract using the acetic acid-induced writhing (extension of hind paw) model in
mice. Aspirin were used as standards drugs. It exhibited reduction in the number of writhing of
71.56 and 65.93% respectively at a dose of 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg. The abdominal
constriction is related to the sensitization of nociceptive receptors to prostaglandins. Thus
suggest that extract showed the analgesic effect probably by inhibiting synthesis or action of
prostaglandins [29].
Antioxidant activity: The antioxidant activity of the aqueous extract of F. religiosa was
investigated in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Since the oxidative stress is the major cause
and consequence of type 2 diabetes. Free radicals generated during oxidative stress damage the
insulin receptors and thereby decrease the number of sites available for insulin function. The
aqueous extract drug reported to contain tannins, flavonoids and polyphenols. At doses 100 and
200 mg/kg of aqueous extracts of F. religiosa shows significantly decrease in fasting blood
glucose and increase in body weight of diabetic rats as compared to untreated rats. F. religiosa at
100 mg/kg dose decreased significantly (p<0.05) superoxide dismutase (SOD) and at dose of 200
mg/kg significantly enhanced catalase (CAT) (p<0.05) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px)
(p<0.01) activity in type 2 diabetic rats. It modulated the SOD activity in dose dependent
manner. Decrease in CAT activity due to less availability of NADPH or gradual decrease in
erythrocyte CAT concentration by excessive generation of oxygen radical that inactivates the
enzyme. Aqueous extract restored the erythrocyte GSH. Decrease in MDA marker by F.
religiosa showed the erythrocyte CAT concentration by excessive generation of oxygen radical
that inactivates the enzyme. Aqueous extract restored the erythrocyte GSH. Decrease in MDA
marker by F. religiosa showed the ability of rasayana drug (rejuvenators, antioxidant, and relieve
stress). The results suggesting that the F. religiosa, a rasayana group of plant drug having
antidiabetic along with antioxidant potential was beneficial in treatment of type 2 diabetes [31].The methanolic extract of F. religiosa showed significant antiradical activity by bleaching 1, 1-
diphenyl-2picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical, EC50 from 11.75 µg was comparable to pyrogallol. It
showed good superoxide scavenging potential, EC50 from 50.65 µg comparable to that of
ascorbic acid and maximum reductive potential at a concentration of 400 µg, which was
comparable to that of gallic acid and tannic acid. These finding suggest the rich phytochemical
content of F. religiosa have good antioxidant activity [14].
The ethanolic extract was subjected to screen for antioxidant activity using DPPH radical
scavenging method. The percentage peroxide value for F. religiosa extract was found in the
range of 6.34% to 13.35% for the extract with 200 µg/ml to 1000 µg/ml strength extract [32]. A
study was carried to localize the oxidative stress enzymes, peroxidase and catalase; and to
quantify the main reactive oxygen species, hydrogen peroxide in F. religiosa. The results
explained that plants grown in adverse habitat showed 55% higher H2O2 production with about
30% increase in peroxidase activity. The three substrates tested for peroxidase activity
(guaiacol, ascorbate and o-dianisidine), o-dianisidine was most preferred substrate of F.
religiosa. Cytosolic peroxidase activity showed eleven fold increase over cell wall bound
peroxidase. Similarly, catalase activity in specimens from adverse habitat showed about two fold
increase during day time [33].
Anticonvulsant activity: An exhaustive study was performed on figs (fruit) of F. religiosa
showed promising anticonvulsant activity in experimental model were seizure induced by
maximum electroshock (MES), picrotoxin and pentylenetetrazol (PTZ). Along with
cyproheptadine, a nonselective serotonin antagonist (4 mg/kg, i.p.) was used to study the reversal
of protective effect of extract in the above mentioned models. Acute toxicity, neurotoxicity and
potentiation of phenobarbitone induced sleep by extract were also studied. The highest amount of
serotonin (5-HT) in figs of this plant as compare to figs of other species reported in Ayurveda.
Furthermore serotonergic neurotransmission is known to modulate a wide variety of
experimentally induced seizure and is involved in seizure protection in various animal models of
epilepsy by altering various GABAnergic and glutamatergic functions. F. religiosa was
measured by using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The analysis was carried
out at 277 nm using 5 µm particles Hypersil GOLD C-18 RP column as a stationary phase.
While 25mM phosphate buffer (pH 2.5) and acetonitrile used as mobile phase at flow rate of 1ml
min-1
.
 It showed an absorption peak with a retention time of 12.563 min same retention time as
that of standard serotonin solution. Hence indicate the presence of serotonin in the extract. The
study showed significant decrease in the duration of tonic hind limb extension in a dose
dependent manner in MES model. In picrotoxin model study extract caused a delay of the
latency to clonic convulsions and activity was found to be euipotent as that of diazepam treated
group at a dose of 100 mg/kg. The extract showed no protection against PTZ induced convulsion
at any dose. Pretreatment with cyproheptadine showed inhibition of anticonvulsant effect of the
extract in both models (MES and picrotoxin). Further the extract showed no mortality and
behavioural changes in acute toxicity model. This study used rotarod test to determine neurotoxic
effect like ataxia, abnormal gait, reduced or inhibited righting reflexes and muscle relaxation.
The extract showed no neurotoxicity and all animals able to maintain equilibrium on rotaing rod
for more than 3 min. The results confirm and justify the use of F. religiosa in ethnomedical
treatment of epilepsy and presence of high serotonin content in its figs led to hypothesize that
figs of F. religiosa may possess anticonvulsant properties via modulating brain serotonin levels,
which will be of clinical usefulness [3].
Antimicrobial activity: The antimicrobial activity of ethanolic extracts of F. religiosa (leaves)
was examined using the agar well diffusion method. The test was performed against four bacteria: Bacillus subtilis (ATCC 6633), Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538), Escherichia coli
(ATCC 11229), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 9027) and against two fungi: Candida
albicans (IMI 349010) and Aspergillus niger (IMI 076837). The results showed that 25mg/ml of
the extract was active against all bacterial strains and effect against the two fungi was
comparatively much less [34]. The antibacterial activity of different extracts from the bark of F.
religiosa was tested against diarrhoeal enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli using disc diffusion
method. The antibacterial activities of extract were compared with standard antibiotics. The
sensitivity of the organisms measured in terms of zone of inhibition ranged from 8.00 to 14.00
mm at 4mg/ml of different extract. The results revealed that methanol extract exhibits good
activity compared to chloroform and aqueous extract. Petroleum ether and hexane extract did not
show any activity [35].
Broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal properties of Ethanolic extracts of 22 traditionally
used Indian medicinal plants were studied for their antimicrobial activity against seven bacteria
(Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella typhimurium, S. paratyphi, S. typhi, E. coli, Shigella
dysenteriae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) and five filamentous fungi (Aspergillus niger,
Alternaria alternata, Fusarium chlamydosporum, Rhizoctonia bataticola and Trichoderma
viride). Of these, 16 plant extracts showed varied level of antibacterial activity against one or
more test bacteria. Similarly antifungal activity was detected among 17 plant extracts
respectively. F. religiosa (leaves) demonstrated more antibacterial activity with less antifungal
activity [36]. Zaidi et al. reported the potential in vitro anti-Helicobacter pylori activity of
medicinal plants from Pakistan that is used to cure GI disorders. Helicobacter pylori was
isolated from the antral biopsy specimens and confirmed through the standard microbiology
procedures. The 70% aqueous-ethanol extracts of Ficus religiosa completely inhibited the
growth of Helicobacter pylori at 500µg/ml in all strains and demonstrate anti-Helicobacter
pylori activity with MBC value ranged from 125 to 250µg/ml [37].
Iqbal et al. investigated that F. religiosa bark methanolic extract was 100% lethal for
Haemonchus. contortus worms during in vitro testing [38]. The acetone extracts of seven plant
species Tamarindus indica, F. indica, F. religiosa, Tabernaemontana livaricate, Murraya
koenigii, Chenopodium album and Syzygium cuminii were evaluated for their ovicidal activity.
Murraya, Tabernaemontana and Chenopodium showed 70%, 75% and 66.6% ovicidal action at
100% dose level whereas at the same dose level T. Indica, F. indica, F. religiosa and S. cuminii
showed 48.3%, 41.6%, 13.3%, 53.3% ovicidal action respectively [39]. The preliminary
screening of antibacterial activity of F. religiosa by agar-well diffusion assay was investigated.
The chloroform extracts of F. religiosa showed a strong inhibitory activity against growth
infectious Salmonella typhi, Salmonella typhimurium and Proteus vulgaris at a MIC of 39, 5 and
20 µg/ml respectively [40].
Wound healing activity: The wound healing activity was investigate by excision and incision
wound models using F. religiosa leaf extracts, prepared as ointment (5 and 10%) were applied
on Wistar albino strain rats. Povidine iodine 5% was used as Standard drug. High rate of wound
contraction, decrease in the period for epithelialisation, high skin breaking strength were
observed in animals treated with 10% leaf extract ointment when compared to the control group
of animals. It has been reported that tannins possess ability to increase the collagen content,
which is one of the factor for promotion of wound healing [41,42].
Anti-amnesic activity: The anti-amnesic activity was investigated using F. religiosa methanol
extract of figs of F. religiosa on scopolamine-induced anterograde and retrograde amnesia in
mice. Figs were known to contain a high serotonergic content, and modulation of serotonergic neurotransmission plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of amnesia. During study, transfer
latency (TL) to the preferred niche in the elevated plus-maze (EPM) and learning avoidance of
passive behavior to avoid punishment in the modified passive avoidance paradigm (MPA) served
as behavioral models for the assessment of memory. Scopolamine (1mg/kg, i.p.) was
administered before training for induction of anterograde amnesia and before retrieval for
induction of retrograde amnesia in both models. TL in the EPM, step down latency (SDL),
number of trials, and number of mistakes in the MPA were determined in vehicle control, F.
religiosa figs treated (10, 50, and 100mg/kg, i.p.), and standard groups (piracetam 200 mg/kg,
i.p.). Cyproheptadine, a non-selective 5-HT1/2 blocker (4 mg/kg, i.p.), was administered along
with the F. religiosa figs to investigate the involvement of serotonergic pathways in the antiamnesic effect of F. religiosa figs. The resulted had anti-amnesic activity against scopolamineinduced amnesia, in a dose-dependent manner. Inhibition of the anti-amnesic effect of F.
religiosa figs by cyproheptadine substantiates the involvement of serotonergic pathways for its
activity [43].
Anti-acetylcholinestrase activity: Methanolic extract of the stem bark of F. religiosa found to
inhibit the acetylcholinestrase enzyme, thereby prolonging the half-life of acetylcholine. It was
reported that most accepted strategies in alzheimer’s diseases treatment is the use of
cholinesterase inhibitors. The calculated 50% inhibitory dose (ID50) value was 73.69 µg/ml
respectively. The results confirm and justify the popular traditional use of this plant for the
treatment of alzheimer’s diseases [44].
Proteolytic Activity: A comparison of the proteolytic activity of the latex of 46 species of Ficus
was done by electrophoretic and chromatographic properties of the protein components. F.
religiosa showed significant proteolytic activity [45].