Ficus religiosa: A wholesome medicinal tree

Sandeep, Ashwani Kumar, Dimple, Vidisha Tomer, Yogesh Gat and
Vikas Kumar
Abstract
Medicinal plants play a vital role in improving health of people. Hundreds of medicinal plants have been
used to cure various diseases since ancient times. Ficus religiosa (Peepal) has an important place among
herbal plants. Almost every part of this tree i.e. leaves, bark, seeds and fruits are used in the preparation
of herbal medicines. Therapeutic properties of this tree in curing a wide range of diseases can be
attributed to its richness in bioactive compounds namely flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, saponins, phenols
etc. Its antimicrobial, anti-diabetic, anticonvulsant, wound healing, anti-inflammatory and analgesic
properties have made it a popular herbal tree and its parts are placed as important ingredient in modern
pharmacological industry. The documentation of traditional and modern usage of F. religiosa under one
heading can help researchers to design and develop new functional foods from F. religiosa.
Keywords: Ficus religiosa, bioactive compounds, nutritional composition, medicinal properties
Introduction
Genus Ficus has 750 species of woody plants, from which Ficus religiosa is one of the
important and usable species (Sharma et al., 2016) [44] and (Joseph and Raj, 2010) [30]
. Ficus
religiosa, commonly known as peepal is one of the oldest trees in Indian literature (Singh et
al., 2015) [46] and (Gautam et al., 2014) [12]. Its existence can be traced back to the Indus valley
civilization (300 BC – 1700 BC) where it was embarked on the currency of that time (Pandey
and Pandey, 2016) [39]. The tree finds its documentation in the holy books of Hinduism such as
Arthasastra, Puranas, Upanishads, Ramayana, Mahabharata, Bhagavad Geeta and Buddhistic
literature. It belongs to family Moraceae and genus Ficus. It derived its botanical name from
two words i.e. ‘Ficus’ a Latin word for ‘fig’ and ‘Religiosa’ refers to ‘religion’ indicating its
importance in Hindu and Buddhist religions (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4]
. The detailed
classification of tree has been presented in Table 1. The tree is native to India and is believed
to originate mainly in Northern and Eastern India. It is also found in its neighboring countries
like Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri- Lanka and China. F. religiosa is known by more than
150 names (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4] and some of the common names of F. religiosa
have been discussed in Table 2. Even in India, it has various names in different regions
according to their languages such as Peepal in Hindi, Ashwatha in Sankrit (Gautam et al.,
2014) [12]
. A detailed list of Indian names of Peepal has been provided in Table 3.
Because of its contribution in historical events it has an important place in medicinal,
mythological and religious systems of India and hence this tree is mostly seen near religious
places (Rutuja et al., 2015) [43]
. The tree grows very large in size with wide spreading branches
and brown colored bark. It has thin shiny leaves and the fruit is compressed and circular in
shape. New immature leaves are red pinkish in color which turns into deep green at the stage
of maturity (Panchawat, 2012) [38]. Flowering occurs in February, onset of fruits start in
summers and ripening is complete before the onset of rainy season (Bhalerao and Sharma,
2014) [4]. Fruits grow in pairs together to form a single mass. Immature fruits are green in color
which changes to blackish purple after ripening (Dharmender et al., 2010) [10]
.
All parts of this tree are rich in phytochemicals and are used in various food and medicinal
preparations. The ripe fruits of F. religiosa are edible and rich source of proteins and minerals
(Ruby et al., 2000) [42] and (Verma et al., 2015) [48]
. Fruits are rich in phytochemicals like
flavonoids, terpenoids, glycosides etc. which are known to cure diseases like asthma and
digestive disorders (Makhija et al., 2010) [35]. The leaves contain phytochemicals such as
flavonoids, terpenoids, tannins etc., which are effective in curing ailments like hiccups,
vomiting, gonorrhea etc. (Bhalerao and Sharma, 2014) [4]. The bark contains phytochemicals
like tannins, saponins, flavonoids etc. which show beneficial effects in health conditions such
as diarrhea, dysentery, inflammation, bacterial infections, bleeding and paralysis (Singh and
Jaiswal, 2014) [47]
. 
~ 33 ~
Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry
All these photochemical make it important remedial plant
especially for people who cannot afford commercial
medicines. Value added products prepared from F. religiosa
are also available in the market. The documentation of edible
parts of tree, their availability, nutritional composition,
phytochemicals and related health benefits can help food
researchers to design new functional foods and nutraceuticals.
This will also open up new ways for the application of this
underutilized fruit. Therefore, in the present review an attempt
has been made to discuss nutritional value, phytochemicals,
medicinal properties and future food prospects of F. religiosa.
Herbal food products available in market
F. religiosa has been used as ingredient in food products like
arjun tea, neotea arasa and candies. Arjun tea acts as
antioxidant, contains micro nutrient Coenzyme Q10 and is
effective in lowering cholesterol and curing heart disease.
Neotea arasa contains flavonoids and sterols which are
effective against jaundice and heart disease. The dry fruit
powder is being used in candies for treatment of asthma,
alternatively it can be consumed after mixing with water.
Some of the food products containing F. religiosa have been
discussed in Table 8.