Pharmacological Uses and Recent Applications of Ficus ReligiosaA Review 

ABSTRACT:
Ficus is among the biggest genera in the plant
kingdom and is part of the Moraceae family. This
review sought to present the medicinal properties
as well as the phytochemistry and pharmacological
effects of two main species belonging to this genus,
specifically Ficus benghalensis as well as Ficus
religiosa. The species are plentiful in all Asian
countries as well as Malaysia. The report on
chemical analysis revealed that Ficus species had a
broad variety of phytoconstituents that included
flavonoids, phenols, alkaloids and saponins. They
also contain tannins, glycosides, terpenoids
proteins volatile and essential oils, and steroids.
The current research on effects of the
pharmacological properties have revealed that the
Ficus species had a wide variety of biological
properties which included anti-oxidants,
Antidiabetic an anti- inflammatory, anti-cancer,
and anti-tumor and ant proliferative properties, as
well as anti- mutagenic an anti-helminthic, antihelminthic, liver protective anticoagulant, wound
healing immune modulatory properties, anti-stress
toxicological studies, and mosquitocidal effects.
Keywords: Ficus Religiosa, Ficus Religiosa uses,
Ficus Religiosa Anti-inflammatory
I. INTRODUCTION
In India the use of herbs has always been
the main kind of medicine, such as Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy. The medicinal
plants are the indigenous of the Indian culture and
have a global significance1
. Genus Ficus includes
more than 750 species of woody plant and of which
Ficus religiosa is one the most important and usefulspecies. Ficus religiosa is commonly referred to as
Peepal, is among the oldest trees mentioned in
Indian literature2
.
Plants constitute livestock, which provide
the essential needs for the entire universe in the
form food clothing, shelter, and food. In addition to
this, they also have their own properties, which are
used in the form of tobacco, pharmaceuticals and
coffee, alcohol as well as other substances across
the world3
. Since the Vedas time, plants have been
used as medicines in the manner in Homeopathy,
Allopathy, Unani and Ayurvedic medicine. In
India, some of the species are considered sacred,
particularly Ficus benghalensis, also called the
country's National Tree that signifies spiritual
knowledge and eternal existence4
.
Some species are edible, and certain
species are used for ornamental plants, including
Ficus Lyrata, also known by the name of fiddle-leaf
fig. These species are the richest sources of
flavonoids, polyphenols and flavonoids5
. They are
antioxidants with strong properties that prevent
ailments caused by oxidative stress, like diabetes,
atherosclerosis and dyslipidemia6
.
Since the beginning of time, it has been
widely used for treatment of diverse diseases, such
as the Swarsh (juice) of the leaf is used in the
treatment of asthma, cough problems with
sexuality, such as hematuria problems with the ears
and teeth headache, eye problems gastric issues as
well as scabies etc7
. Decoction of leaf is utilized as
an analgesic to treat toothache. The stem bark is
utilized in the treatment of bleeding, gonorrhea,
diarrhea, fractures, antiseptic, and astringent and so
on8
.

II. ECOLOGY AND DISTRIBUTION
The tree grows to be huge in size, with
broad branching branches that spread out and
brown bark. It has thin leaves, and its fruit is
swollen and circular in form12. The immature
leaves of the new season are pinkish and transform
into deep green in the time of maturation. The
flowering season begins in February. The onset of
fruit development begins in the summer months
and ripening becomes completed before the
beginning of the rainy season. Fruits are ripe in
pairs to create an entire mass. The young fruits are
green that change to blackish- purple as they
mature13
.
Ficus Religiosa is a widespread plant
which is found in hot regions of the world
particularly in the south East Asia including some
part of the Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan and India.
This plant is inherent to the some tropical regions
of the Asia14. It has been distributed around the
world, cultivated and spread. Naturally, it is wild
tree, could easily found out in the forest (dry and
rainy). There it has been propagated and cultivated.
Although, the tree has widely spread around the
corners, it is called by its 150 different names15.
Ficus Religiosa is considered to be having long life
span compatibility and average life is between 950-
1550 years. F. Religiosa used to grow from the sea
level of 35 ft. to 4995 ft. The height of the plants
goes up to 100 ft. and the shoot width goes up to 10
ft16. Ficus Religiosa is also considered as the
ornamental plants, it has been cultivated for the
nursery and gardens from long time. Due to its
growing habitat the tree could easily survive in hot
and cold environment. The climate change does
not affect the growth of the tree. This epiphytic
plant does have the long hanging branches with
long petioles. The leaves are glossy and ovate in shape. Leaves are shiny with the petiole consisting
of a slight curve; the length of the leaves could be
between 9-13 cm broad and 7-11 cm long17. The
bark of the tree bent towards the end with having
the 6-9 cm thickness. Bark is slightly on the grey
side and covered with the crustose lichen brown or
ash colored surface. Greenish fruits with 1.5 cm
diameter are used grow in the pair. Male and
female trees could be easily identified with the
structure and morphology of the tree18
.
Tradition Belief of the Ficus Religiosa
The Moraceae-often called the mulberry
family or fig family. Ficus religiosa is the most
popular one in this family. It has mythical, pious
and medicinal properties which enhance its
importance in Indian culture19. There are such
numerous holy books like Arthasastra, Puranas,
Upanishads, Ramayana, Mahabharata, BhagavadGita and Buddhist literature depicting Ficus
religiosa. Based on Vedic chronicles in the Padma
Purana, Brahma Purana and SkandaPurana, the
Peepal tree considers as an indicative of Lord
Vishnu20.
Even on that it’s a firm belief of people that all
Trimurti’s (Brahma,Vishnu, Mahesh) are born
under this tree in Panchawa21. According to a
mythological theory, Brahma enthroned the root of
Peepal, trunk of trees devoted as Lord Vishnu and
the leaves are regarded as Mahesh/Lord Shiva.
Peepal tree procreate by far and wide and the
ranches seem like supportive pillars. It’s also
known by ‘Kalpavriksha’. Therefore, on the basis
of different religious and historical beliefs, Ficus
religiosa is glimpsed with numerous colloquial
names22

III. PHARMACOLOGICAL USES OF
FICUS RELIGIOSA
3.1.Antioxidant Activity
Baliyan, S., 2022 et al., examined that
antioxidant activity was assessed by the DPPH
activity. Ficus Religiosa is an important medicinal
plant which is having the antioxidant properties as
well as antibacterial properties. However, DPPH is
an excellent marker of the analyzing the antioxidant activity. To analyze the DPPH, the
technique which would be used as elimination of
the DPPH from the cells and then free radicles
could be stabilized. This techniques also involved
the DPPH interrelates with electrons and provide
yields at 517nm. In this study extracts of the F.
religiosa was interacts with the cells and DPPH
was analyzed by the UV spectrophotometer. As the
result showed that the DPPH activity was increased
in the exposed extract of the F. religiosa. It could
be concluded by the results that Ficus Religiosa
does possess the anti-oxidant activities23
.
Another study was performed by the Murugesu, S.,
2021 et al., confirming the anti-oxidant activity of
the F. religiosa. The extracts were prepared
separately for the leaves and stem. Both the extract
was subjected to the analysis of DPPH in the cells.
The extracts were prepared through the steam
distillation and maceration method in organic and
inorganic solvents. Phytochemical test were
performed to confirm the bio compound present in
the leaves and stem thus, can correlate with the
activity. The active phytochemical were found as
alkaloids, terpenoids, and flavonoids. The results
showed and confirmed the anti-oxidant activity of
the tree. According to the total antioxidant assay
the results were satisfactory. And, study also
reveals that the maximum antioxidant activity was
seen in the organic solvents. However, inorganic
solvent also indicates the presence of the antioxidants24
.
Anti-microbial Activity
Ficus religiosa does have the anti-oxidant
activity and other medicinal benefits as described
by the Koirala, B., 2021 et al. The methanolic
extract were prepared in the organic solvent
methanol and exposed to the bacteria (gram
negative). The zone of inhibition was detected by
the placing it on the center of the petri plate. That
submerged round paper were the marker for the
zone and surrounding area was considered for the
inhibition zone. 122.3 μg/ml extract was prepared
and exposed; results showed that support the
hypothesis of the author. The zone of inhibition was observed during the experiment which
explains that the phytochemicals presents in the
plants could possibly have the anti-microbial
properties. To support this argument author has
done qualitative test of phytochemicals present in
the plant. Alkaloids, saponins, flavonoids and
tannins were majorly found in the extract of the
plant part in methanol25
.
The similar study was performed by the
Chavan, A., 2019 et al., against the E. coli and
Staphylococcus aureus. The Minimal inhibitory
concentration was found during the exposure of the
extract as a result. At the concentration of the 25
mg/mL and 12 mg/mL ethanolic extract of the
Ficus religiosa leaves does have the anti-microbial
property26
.
The antimicrobial properties of the plants
were seen by the Mamta, P. S., 2021 et al., against
the gram positive and gram negative bacteria. The
different extracts were prepared usingdifferent
solvents such as organic and inorganic. All the
extracts at the different dose concentrations were
exposed to the gram positive and gram negative
bacteria27
.
Antidiabetic activity
Ficus religiosa is considered to have the
renoprotective function also. Singh, T. G., 2020 et
al., studied that the F. religiosa decreases the
oxidative stress which helps to maintain
equilibrium between blood glucose and energy of
the body and possibly share same pathology of the
disease. By decreasing the free radicals in body
down the antioxidant level and increase the activity
of the renal and other glucose regulatory
mechanism. The results also suggested that it can
also help to reduce the oxidative stress to overcome
the disease particularly in the chronic diabetes. In
this study diabetes were induced by the single
injection of the streptozotocin in the rats. The
extract was given at the different doses for 45 days
and blood glucose was recorded once in day.
Histopathology results suggested that F. religiosa
does have the renoprotective function. Blood
parameters revealed that it helps in reduce the
blood glucose and oxidative stress28
.
Similar study was performed by the
Choudhary, S., et al., (2011). In this study, the
ethanolic extract of the plant were used and
administered in the Wistar rats. Diabetes was
induced buy the single injection of the Alloxan.
The three dose concentrations were followed in the
study; however the lowest dose was administered
as 100mg/kg. The results showed that the plant extract could not be able to help in the lowering the
blood glucose level. Precisely, the fruit extract does
not endorse the effectiveness on the blood glucose
level. And, the leaf extract too does not have any
effect on lowering the glucose level29
.
Tiwari, P., et al., (2017) did an
experiments with the endophytic fungus grown on
the plant extract with the help of the potato
dextrose media. The fungi was isolated from the
PDA plates and incubated at 37°C for 21 days. The
experiment was done to evaluate the α- amylase, αglucosidase inhibition by the fungus extract. The
result showed the maximum inhibition of αamylase, α-glucosidase by 91 and 42%
respectively. The results are also revealed that the
percentage of inhibition was near to the standard30
.
Anticancer activity
Shaikh, A., et al., (2020) explore the
opportunities of this magical plant Ficus religiosa.
The anticancer activities were evaluated by using
leaves extract in chloroform against the breast
cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231). The cell lines
were grown up to the 70% confluency and exposed
by the extract at the different concentrations.
Further, the phytochemical analysis was done by
the LCMS to identify the specific phytochemical.
The in vitro test performed to see the activity of the
Ficus religiosa extract using the trypan blue and
growth inhibition. The extract was managed to kill
the 50% of cells in dye test, the test was evaluated
by using the spectrophotometer. The results are
also revealed that extract of the Ficus religiosa
could resist the cell growth and inhibited up to 500
µg/mL concentrations. Hence, Ficus religiosa
plants extract could possibly inhibit and kill the
cancer cells31
.
Similar study was done by the Saida, L., et
al., (2021) using the extract of the latex of Ficus
religiosa. The study was performed human breast
cancer cell line. The results showed the significant
decrease in the cell lines by inhibiting the growth
by 50% at the IC50 4.8 μg/ml. The cell cycle was
also observed by the Flowcytometry analysis. The
cell cycle arrest happened in the G2/M phase of the
cell. The cell inhibition and reducing the growth
has happened due to the pre and anti- apoptotic.
Based on the results it can concluded that the Ficus
religiosa possess the anticancer activities32
.
Tulasi, C. D. S. L. N., et al., (2018)
concludes that Ficus religiosa possess the cytotoxic
activity against the cell lines breast cancer cell line
MCF-7. The activity was performed using MTT.
The cell lines were grown in the 96 well plates for 24h and exposed with the test item for 24h at the
different concentrations. The growth of the cells
was analyzed by using MTT dye which gives a
blue color formazan. The IC50 value was maximum
in the ethanolic extract and lowest in the ethyl
acetate extract. By the results it could be concluded
that ethanolic extract of the Ficus religiosa could
inhibit the cell growth by 50% at the dose of
101µg/ml33
.
Anti-inflammatory activity
Mamidisetti, Y. D., et al., (2018)
concluded that the methanolic extract of the Ficus
religiosa fruits possess the anti-inflammatory
properties. The study was done in Wistar rats.
Inflammation was induced by the carrageenan. The
dose was administered at 200 and 400mg/kg per
animal. The inflammation (paw edema) was
induced by the single injection of the carrageenan.
The evaluation parameter was assessed for the paw
licking. Inflammation was considerably reduced in
the high dose groups of animals. Histopathology
also revealed that inflammatory cells were reduced
at site of the injection. Similarly the experiment
was performed for acetic acid induced writhing, the
same doses were administered and result revealed
that high dose was more pronounced as compared
to other groups34
.
Similar study was performed by the
Charde, R. M., et al., (2010), the ethanolic extract
were administered in the animals. The
inflammation was induced in the animals by using
the single injection of the carrageenan. The doses
were administered at 200µg/ml to 1000 µg/ml. The
paw licking activity was seen in the animals. The
rates of the paw licking were reduced by 6-13% in
test animals. These results were comparable with
the standard drug Diclofenac35
.
Rathod, V. D., et al., (2018) were
examined the anti-inflammatory activities of Ficus
religiosa. In this study, ethanolic extracts was
prepared and administered in the arthritis induced
animals. The doses were given at 100, 200, and
400mg/kg for 21 days. Different parameters were
assessed during the study to confirm the activity of
the plant extract such as knee diameter, rota rod,
arthritic score and body weight. Each parameter
was evaluated once in a three days interval till the
day of necropsy. The results showed that at the
dose of 200 and 400mg/kg the activities were
significantly enhanced and inflammation was
reduced in all the animals. Blood parameter results
revealed that RBA, WBC, ESR count and TNFalpha level were reduced. Hence, it could be