Nyctanthes arbor-tristis: Medicinal uses and plant care tips

Nyctanthes arbor-tristis is a flowering plant, widely known as Parijat in India, that produces flowers with white petals attached to an orangish tube in a pinwheel pattern. Also known as night-flowering jasmine, the plant belongs to the Oleaceae family, not the Jasminum genus. As per Hindu tradition, Parijat is considered as an auspicious flower. There are many mythological stories associated with it. The plant is used in Ayurveda owing to its medicinal benefits.

Nyctanthes arbor-tristis: Significance of Parijat

As per Hindu tradition, Parijat flowers are auspicious as they are regarded as those belonging to the heaven. It is believed that one who owns this flower denotes love and never faces any hardship, as per ancient mythology. It blooms after Ganga Dussehra.

Further, the flower is unisex. It was believed to be given to Lord Krishna’s wives as a gift denoting love. Hence, it is auspicious for newlywed couples to grow this plant and promote love.

Nyctanthes arbor-tristis: Medicinal uses

- The leaves of the Nyctanthes arbor-tristis plant find their use in Ayurveda and Homoeopathy for the treatment of sciatica, fevers, and arthritis.
- They are also used as a laxative for treating constipation.
- The plant has properties that help treat snake bites.
- Nyctanthes arbor-tristis helps in hair fall treatment, scalp recovery, and skin recovery.
- The leaves contain antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties. Dried leaves of Nyctanthes arbor-tristis are used in Assamese food recipes

Nyctanthes arbor-tristis: Plant care 
Sunlight and temperature

The plant is native to the tropical zone and prefers a hot climate. Place the plant exposed to sunlight for a minimum of four hours to a maximum of eight hours. In summer, keep the plant in sunlight for around four hours and bring in shade later.
Watering

The plant needs water daily in warm weather. Avoid standing or clogged water as excess water can damage the plant’s root system. Go for periodic deep watering for healthy growth.
Soil

Choose well-drained, fertile soil, rich in organic content.

Fertiliser

Provide the plant with sufficient well-decomposed compost and vermicompost. Use potassium-based fertilisers, or use onion, or banana peels fertiliser if you want the plant to produce flowers. Add phosphorous-rich, bonemeal fertiliser if it still does not bloom.
Pruning

Pruning the plant helps it to bloom. Regular trimming is regular as the shoots grow in different directions.
Pest management

The plant is prone to attacks by white flies, mites, leaf minors and aphids. Make sure to regularly wash the plant using strong water sprayer mist. Spraying neem oil is another good option to keep pests away.

Nyctanthes arbor-tristis: Tree of sorrow

The word arbor-tristis refers to a sad tree. Nyctanthes arbor-tristis is referred to as the tree of sorrow, as the flowers lose brightness during the day.