Nyctanthes arbor-tristis

Common Name: Coral Jasmine
General Information
Coral jasmine is a large shrub or small tree with spreading branches, growing up to 10 metres tall.
The plant is particularly valued for its flowers which are used in traditional medicine, as a dye and a source of an essential oil. The plant has very fragrant flowers and is widely cultivated as an ornamental in tropical and subtropical regions all over the world. It is often planted near Hindu temples in India and Sri Lanka, as well as in Malaysia and Indonesia.
Known Hazards
The bark contains a glycoside and alkaloids, suspected of being poisonous to animals and humans.
Botanical References

Range
E. Asia - India, Nepal, Pakistan, Thailand, Indonesia.
Habitat
Rocky ground in dry hillsides, and as undergrowth in dry deciduous forest.

Cultivation Details
A plant of tropical and subtropical areas, where it is found at elevations from sea level to 1,500 metres. It tolerates a wide range of rainfall patterns, from seasonal to non-seasonal.
The plant tolerates moderate shade.
The flowers open at sunset and usually wither after sunrise the next day.
The shrub coppices readily.
Some cultivars with ornamental value have been described in India, for instance 'Karna-phool' and 'Seeya Shrinagar'.
Edible Uses
A saffron-yellow dye obtained from the flowers is used for colouring food.
Medicinal
The flowers contain an abundance of mannitol and are emmenagogue. They are used medicinally to provoke menstruation.

The bitter leaves are useful as a cholagogue, laxative, diaphoretic and diuretic. An extract is given to children for the expulsion of roundworms and threadworms.
An anti-inflammatory activity of the leaves has been recorded recently.
Substances found in the leaves include mannitol, ß-amyrin, ß-sitosterol, benzoic acid and derivates of kaempferol.

Powdered seeds ameliorate scalp scurf.
Agroforestry Uses:
Coral jasmine is sometimes planted in hedges.
Other Uses
The bright orange corolla tubes of the flowers contain a saffron-yellow colouring matter, which was formerly used for dyeing silk, sometimes in conjunction with safflower (Carthamus tinctorius), turmeric (Curcuma longa), and indigo (Indigofera spp.). Locally the dye is also used for dyeing cotton cloth and as a cheap substitute for saffron in colouring the robes of Buddhist priests. For dyeing, fabrics are immersed in a decoction of the corolla tubes. They impart a beautiful orange, yellow or golden colour like saffron, but the colour is easily washed out, and will fade rapidly in the sun. To make the colour more permanent, lime juice or alum is added to the dye bath, then the colour is moderately resistant to light, soap, alkali and acid.
The dye is nyctanthin, which is allied to crocetin as found in saffron (Crocus sativus L.).

An insecticidal effect of an extract of the shade-dried leaves has been reported.

The bark may be used as a tanning material.

The leaves are sometimes used for polishing wood and ivory.

The essential oil in the fragrant flowers, which is similar to the oil in jasmine, is used as perfume.

The brown wood is moderately hard, fairly heavy and close-grained. It is sometimes used for boarding.
The wood is sometimes used as firewood.
Propagation
Coral jasmine is easily propagated by seeds or cuttings.