Parijat: Benefits, Uses, Ayurvedic Indications, Dosage, and Side Effects

Prized for its soothing and calming fragrance, Parijat, fondly known as the Night Jasmine flower is well known not only for its ornamental nature but also for its wide range of medicinal qualities. Right from treating and managing arthritis, cold and cough, fever, worms, indigestion, wounds, and diabetes, to malaria, the beautiful white bloom does it all. Parijat holds a strong place in Ayurvedic scriptures for the treatment of various diseased conditions since ancient times. According to the Indian mythological literature, Parijat is mentioned as a ‘tree from heaven’ and it is also mentioned in Bhagwad Gita and Harivamsa Purana as the main flower that is used to worship Ma Durga. Let us know more about the curative qualities of the beautiful night jasmine flower.

What Is Parijat?

Parijat, that goes by the scientific name Nyctanthes arbor tristis belongs to the Oleaceae family. It is a small tree or a shrub growing up to 33 feet tall with a grey flaky bark. The leaves are quite broad, lanceolate with a margin. The flowers look breath-taking with 5 to 8 white corolla petals, having an orangish-red centre. They mainly bloom at night, and fall down as the dawn appears, forming the white icy carpet. The fruit of this plant is brown in colour, round to heart shaped capsule of 2 cm diameter containing a single seed. Parijat chiefly grows on rocky ground in dry hill shades, dry deciduous forests or at sea-level up to 1500 m altitude with a wide range of rainfall patterns, from seasonal to non-seasonal and is tolerant to moderate shade. It thrives well in a wide variety of loamy soils and in soils found in average gardening environments. This flower is found in abundance in West Bengal, India and also in Kanchanaburi Province in Thailand. Parijat is loaded with medicinal qualities and is native to Southeast Asia and South Asia.
Parijat Synonyms

Parijat is known by different names in different parts of the world. Some of its common English names include Night-flowering Jasmine, Coral jasmine, Night Jasmine, Sad Tree, Tree-of-Sorrow, Tree of Sadness, Parijat, Lover’s Tree, Har Singar, and Queen of the Night.

In the various Indian provinces, jasmine is known as Rat ki rani, Harsinghar, Parijat,  Paarijaatak, Harsingur, Seoli, Sheoli, Sihau in Hindi, Parijat , Prajakta, Parijataka, Parijathak, Kharbadi, Kharassi, Khurasli in Marathi, Parjatamu, Kapilanagadustu, Pagadamalle, Parijat, Sepali in Telugu, Manjatpu Pavelam, Pavazha Malli, Majjapu, Parijata, Paghala, Pavala-malligai, Pavazha-malligai in Tamil, Parijattah, Goli, Harsing in Kannada, Parijat, Harshanagar, Jayaparvati, Parijatak in Gujarati, Ganga Shiuli, Godokodiko, Gunjoseyoli, Singaraharo in Oriya and Sephalika, Harsinghar, Seuli, Seoli, Sheoli in Bengali.

Ayurveda knows it by the following Sanskrit terminologies which include Vatari, Shuklangi, Shephalika, Shephali, Prajakta, Prajakt, Parijata,  Mandara, Parijatah, Parijataka, Aparajitha and Vijaya.

Biochemical Constituents of Parijat

The leaves of Harsingar contains fructose, glucose, carotene, amorphous resin, methyl salicylate, ascorbic acid, benzoic acid, tannic acid, oleanolic acid and flavanol glycosides.  The bark of this plant is useful due to its alkaloids and glycosides content. The flowers are extremely beneficial as it contains essential oils and glycosides which possesses antifungal and antiviral properties while the seeds of this plant contain palmitic, oleic and myristic acids. Parijat also showcases antileishmanial, hepatoprotective and immunostimulant qualities.
Ayurvedic Indications Of Parijat

Ayurveda, the holistic science of herbal remedies has extensively mentioned this herb time and gain in several ayurvedic scriptures and journals for various indications which include, Rasayani (rejuvenates the whole body), Balya (improves muscle strength), Vayasthapana (prevents ageing),  Jvara (useful in fever), Kasahara (Relieves cough, Shwasha (relieves breathing difficulties), Amahara (treats indigestion), Deepana (enhances stomach fire), Pachana (helps in digestion), Rochana (stimulates appetite), Vajikaran (improves libido), Anulomana (improves breathing), Vamana (prevents nausea and vomiting),  Dahahara (relieves burning sensation), Prameha (manages diabetes), Trutahara (relieves excessive thirst), Mehahara (treats urinary tract disorders),  Gulmajit (useful in abdominal tumours), Hikkanigrahana (controls hiccups), Kantya (relieves sore throat), Triptighno (relieves pseudo-satiation), Hridaya (treats heart problems),  Vamanopaga (treats emesis), Shonitasthapana (prevents bleeding), Pandu (treats anaemia), Sangrahini (treats diarrhoea), Kustha (treats skin disorders),  Varnya (improves complexion),  Krimihara (relieves intestinal worms), Kanthya (improves voice) and Pushtida (good for nutrition).

Ayurvedic Benefits Of Parijat
Relieves Pain And Inflammation

Parijat intrinsically possesses potent analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties, which is pivotal in reducing joint and muscle pain, thereby reducing the chances of chronic autoimmune inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis which occurs due to the vitiation of Vata Doshas. Being a natural vasodilator, it is also used to treat painful muscle spasms, sore muscles, sciatica etc.

Grind 6 to 7 leaves of Night Jasmine and mix in water and boil it till the quantity is reduced to half. Now cool it and drink this concoction on an empty stomach in the morning to reduce joint pain.

Also Read: What Is Rheumatoid Arthritis? Learn How To Deal With It
Combats Respiratory Issues

Sanctified with powerful anti-inflammatory, anti-biotic, and anti-asthmatic properties, Parijat offers a one-stop traditional remedy for all sorts of respiratory distress.  It is vital in treating the common cold, sore throat, cough and flu symptoms. When taken alongside honey and warm water on an empty stomach, it actively thins and loosens sputum particles within the lungs, chest and nasal cavities and eases breathing. It is also highly beneficial for providing faster relief from non-productive cough, asthma and other bronchial conditions.
Heals Wounds And Infections

Parijat portrays strong anti-bacterial, anti-viral and antifungal properties that are not only used for removing bacteria and germs from the body but also treats wounds and improves healing. The bioactive compounds present in this perfumed bloom has been used since the ancient times to treat various skin issues like sores, ulcers, skin fungus, etc.
Treats Malaria

Malaria is a mosquito-borne disease that chiefly occurs due to the malarial parasite Plasmodium characterizing symptoms like high fever, muscular pain, vomiting, convulsions etc.  The potent anti-parasitic action of the parijat leaves restricts the growth of the malarial parasite right at the ring stage and hence prevents aggravation of the infection.

Also Read: World Malaria Day: Fight Malaria With These Home Remedies
Promotes Digestion

Parijat is a traditional remedy for improving gut health and treating a wide range of gastrointestinal disorders like diarrhoea, flatulence, peptic ulcer, esophagitis, heartburn, gastroesophageal reflux disease, indigestion, and stomach pain. The carminative nature of the flower and the leaves helps in breaking down the food particles in the stomach and intestine, enhances the secretion of the digestive juices and thereby increases the absorption of essential nutrients through the intestines. It helps to eliminate abdominal gas and in turn reduces abdominal distension, bloating and gaseous cramps. Being a potent laxative, it also helps in free passage of stools thus treating constipation.

Also Read: 5 Herbs For A Healthy Digestive System
Regulates Diabetes

Diabetes is known as Madhumeha in Ayurveda and owing to the presence of numerous beneficial herbs, Parijat is an excellent herb for managing high sugar levels by improving the metabolism due to its Tikta (bitter) and Kashaya (astringent) properties and Kapha-Pitta balancing doshas. The excellent anti-glycemic nature of the herb plays a quintessential role in alleviating the blood sugar levels of the body. Intake of this herb activates the pancreas and stimulates the secretion of a balanced amount of Insulin and also regulates the metabolism of carbohydrates. This action readily helps the extra glucose circulating in the blood to get converted into glycogen which in turn prevents sudden spikes in the blood sugar level. It readily helps diabetic patients to maintain the control over the blood glucose levels in the blood naturally.

Also Checkout: Diabetes: 5 Incredible Herbs For Controlling Blood Sugar Levels- Infographic
Manages Blood Pressure

Parijat acts as a natural antihypertensive agent which normalizes the blood pressure levels and keeps it under check. It is extremely pivotal in both hypertension and hypotension conditions. By improving the heart functions, it enhances cardiovascular endurance which brings the blood pressure to a stable level and maintains balanced readings.
Treats Piles

Piles or Haemorrhoids are enlarged blood vessels that one can get inside or around your anus (the opening of your bottom). Because of the sedentary lifestyle in today’s times, this painful condition has become one of the most common issues developed due to chronic constipation. When Vata dosha becomes imbalanced in the body, constipation is created. These conditions often lead to Piles or mass formation near or inside the opening of the anus when ignored or untreated. Parijat extensively helps to manage constipation effectively, thus preventing the formation of piles.

Also Read: Haemorrhoids: 6 Amazing Natural Home Remedies To Heal Piles
Augments Skin

The host of anti-bacterial properties of the Parijat leaf extract plays a crucial role in treating skin infections like acne, warts, boils, eczema, blisters, itching etc. Not only does it improve complexion by evening out the skin tone, but also clear blocked pores, and reduces various signs of ageing like wrinkles, fine lines, spots, pigmentation etc. Owing to the antiseptic nature, the oil obtained from its flowers also prevent wounds and injuries and speeds up the healing process.
Remedies Hair Troubles

The wealth of antioxidant, astringent and antimicrobial properties in Parijat flower extract makes it extremely beneficial for all sorts of hair woes. Sanctified with essential bioactive constituents, parijat not only enhances blood circulation in the hair follicles but also prevents various hair infections and actively takes part in collagen formation. It is extremely useful for treating dandruff, revitalizing dull, lifeless hair. Regular use of the oil obtained from its flowers improve hair texture, adds shine and stimulates hair growth. By effectively alleviating stress, it also prevents hair fall and premature greying of hair.

Effect On Doshas:

Parjit is naturally blessed with Tikta (i.e., bitter) Rasa and Rukshna (i.e., dry) and Laghu (i.e., light) gunas. It has Ushna Virya (i.e., hot potency) and Katu Vipaka (i.e., pungent metabolic property). Being a KaphaVata Shamaka, the bioactive ingredients in this bitter medicinal herb pacifies the Vata (air) doshas and Kapha (earth and water) doshas and often an excess of it can aggravate the Pitta (fire and air) doshas.

Owing to the intrinsic properties and doshas, Parijat portrays a strong effect on the various Dhatus (i.e. body tissues) which are Rasa (i.e., Plasma), Rakta (i.e., Blood), Mamsa (i.e. Muscles), Medha (i.e., Brain) and Asthi (i.e. Bones).

Also Read: Introduction To Ayurveda: Learn About Vata, Pitta And Kapha Doshas
Dosage:

Parijat can be consumed in both powder and juice form. The appropriate therapeutic dosage of Parijat usually varies from person to person depending upon the age, body strength, effects on appetite, severity, and condition of the patient. It is strongly recommended to consult an ayurvedic doctor or practitioner as he or she would evaluate the patient’s indications, past medical conditions and prescribe an effective dose for a specific time period.

Parijat Side Effects

Parijat is extremely beneficial in prescribed amount but an excess of it can be very detrimental for health. Since it is bitter in taste, people who have taste sensitivity can experience slight nausea on consumption. Excessive amount of parijat for the treatment if cough and cold without doctor consultation can be fatal to the throat. On chewing the leaves of this plant, one can also get a yellowish tinge in the tongue.
Conclusion

Parijat is one such perfumed bloom that is blessed with umpteen health benefits. Thanks to the goodness of the essential bio-active ingredients, it is widely used for treating flu and feverish conditions, managing cough and cold, sore throat, preventing viral infections, promoting digestion, relieving arthritic pain and many more.