Betelvine (Piper betle L.): A comprehensive insight into its ethnopharmacology, phytochemistry, and pharmacological, biomedical and therapeutic attributes

Abstract
Piper betle L. (synonym: Piper betel Blanco), or betel vine, an economically and medicinally important cash crop, belongs to the family Piperaceae, often known as the green gold. The plant can be found all over the world and is cultivatedprimarily in South East Asian countries for its beautiful glossy heart‐shaped leaves, which are chewed or consumed as betelquidand widely used in Chinese and Indian folk medicine, as carminative, stimulant,astringent, against parasitic worms, conjunctivitis, rheumatism, wound, etc., andis also used for religious purposes. Hydroxychavicol is the most important bioactive compound among the wide range of phytoconstituents found in essential oil and extracts. The pharmacological attributes of P. betle are antiproliferation, anticancer, neuropharmacological, analgesic, antioxidant, antiulcerogenic, hepatoprotective, antifertility, antibacterial, antifungal and many more. Immense attention has been paid to nanoformulations and their applications. The application of P. betle did not show cytotoxicity in preclinical experiments, suggesting that it could serve as a promising therapeutic candidate for different diseases. The present review comprehensively summarizes the botanical description, geographical distribution, economic value and cultivation, ethnobotanical uses, preclinical pharmacological properties with insights of toxicological, clinical efficacy, and safety of P. betle. The findings suggest that P. betle represents an orally active and safe natural agent that exhibits great therapeutic potential for managing various human medical conditions. However, further research is needed to elucidate its underlying molecular mechanisms of action, clinical aspects, structure–activity relationships, bioavailability and synergistic interactions with other drugs.

Keywords: Betelvine (Piper betle L.), ethnobotany, hydroxychavicol, nanoparticles, pharmacology, phytochemicals
Go to:
1. INTRODUCTION
Piper betle L. (synonym: Piper betel Blanco) (Piperaceae) is a widely known perennial creeping plant belonging to the genus Piperaceae and originates from central and eastern Peninsular Malaysia and is distributed to East Africa and tropical countries of Asia. 1 It is a commercial cash crop cultivated mainly in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka Thailand, Taiwan, Malaysia and few other Southeast Asian countries. 2 , 3 The betelvine is called the ‘green gold of India’ because almost 20 million people depend on this plant to derive their source of income from the production, transportation, handling, processing and preparation of betel leaves. 4 , 5 The betel vine is usually an asexually propagated plant that has various cultivars and bears both male and female plants. About a hundred varieties of betel plants are found across the world, among them 40 varieties are found only in India and of which 30 are recorded from West Bengal and Bangladesh. 6 The most common varieties of betel are Magadhi, Salem, Mysore, Bangla, Kauri, Venmony, Meetha, Kapoori, Sanchi, Banarasi, Desavari, Kasi, Ghanagete and Bagerhati, which are mainly based upon their colour, aroma, taste and size. 1 P. betle is known by various names in different countries around used globe, though ‘Paan’ is the most used in India, Pakistan, Nepal and Bangladesh. 7 The betel leaf and areca nuts play a central role in Hindu culture as they are used in a variety of social, cultural and religious ceremonies. 1 Betel quid is a common practice in many countries because it acts as a natural tonic and mouth refresher to prevent oral malodour. The International Agency for Research on Cancer surveyed and estimated that there are 200–600 million users present globally (Refs 251 , 271 ; IARC).

The use of P. betle is found in many traditional medicinal systems, such as the Indian Ayurvedic medicinal system, traditional Chinese medicine, and also in the folklore medicinal system of the West Indies and Latin America. In the Ayurvedic medicine system, P. betle plants are used as preparation varieties for the treatment of many diseases, known as Lokantha Rasa, Puspadhava Rasa, Laghu‐sutaseknara Rasa, Lanha, Brhat sarwajwarahara and Brhat visamaj warantaka Rasa. The juice prepared from the betle leaf is generally used as an adjuvant in many herbal combinations with different other medicinal plants for better results in Ayurveda. 8 Traditionally, the plant is used to cure many ailments such as cold, bronchial asthma, cough, stomachalgia and rheumatism, and it is used for the treatment of other diseases such as boils, bad breath, constipation, conjunctivitis, gum swelling, abscesses, injuries and cuts, which are communicable or noncommunicable. 9 The use of this plant is also found in other purposes, such as in fish poisoning, fish bait, insecticides, ornaments, oils, perfumes and hallucinogens. 10

Pharmacological properties of medicinal plants are primarily attributed to a variety of bioactive phytochemicals with biomedical and pharmaceutical significance. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 Plants are known to house a number of different classes of phytoconstituents 19 , 20 , 21 such as alkaloids, glycosides, tannins, phenolic compounds, flavonoids, terpenes and oligosaccharides. 22 , 23 , 24 Such phytochemicals have also been reported against an array of human ailments. 20 , 21 , 25 The strong pungent aroma comes from the leaves of betel because the essential oil contains a good quantity of terpenes and phenols. 26 , 27 , 28 The essential oil from betel leaf is to some extent a greasy, slippery and viscous liquid at room temperature. A wide diversity of bioactive compounds is present in the leaves of betel, this difference is based on the environment, soil types, the location of growing and types of landraces. 7 The wide range of phytochemicals present in the betel plants was identified as chavicol, chavibetol, hydroxychavicol, eugenol, estragole, methyl eugenol, hydroxycatechol, α‐pinene, caryophyllene, β‐pinene, 1,8‐cineol and others. 29 In a recent report, combining herbs (P. betle leaves) and herbo‐minerals (Swarna bhasma) in a dosage‐dependent manner was used to treat Corona patients by enhancing their prophylactic and therapeutic effects. 30

Various extraction methods are used for the extraction of volatile oils from the leaves of betel, including hydrodistillation, steam distillation, solvent extraction and supercritical fluid extraction that were characterized by GC‐MS, NMR. 1 Huge numbers of studies have revealed the efficacy of the bioactive compounds present in essential oil as antioxidants to prevent cancer, inflammation, neurodegenerative disorders, and also as antimutagenic, antifertility, antilipidaemic, antiglycaemic, cardioprotective, etc. 31 , 32 The essential oil of betel leaves can also combat bacterial, protozoan and fungal infections and insect attacks.

This review comprehensively summarizes the botanical description, economic status, pharmacological properties, nanoformulations and their applications taking into account the safety and toxicity. In addition, the underlying molecular basis of the action of plant extracts or phytochemicals are also discussed. Considering the immense potential of this underexploited medicinal plant, the present review comprehensively describes the present state of the art research on this plant with an interdisciplinary approach that includes the pharmacology, nanotechnology, preclinical and clinical studies and also potential toxicological considerations of using P. betle preparations. However, more studies are needed to enumerate the structure–activity relationships behind the pharmacological activity of plant constituents. Detailed clinicalstudies are also needed, and the pharmacokinetic properties and druggability ofsuch preparations need to be elucidated.

Go to:
2. TAXONOMY
Taxonomical classification

Kingdom: Plantae

Division: Magnoliophyta

Class: Magnoliopsida

Order: Piperales

Family: Piperaceae

Genus: Piper

Species: Piper betle L. 33

Go to:
3. BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION
The plant (Figure 1) is a dioecious root climber, and the shoots reach any height from 3 to 10 m according to available facilities for climbing. The plant bears lateral branches along its entire length that grow a couple of feet from the ground. The stems are swollen and articulate, with dichotomous branching and rooting at the nodes. The stems are stout, almost terete, slightly flattened; when young, they are light green and marked by short, raised, whitish streaks and with pinkish stripes along the node. The internodes generally attain a length of about 12 cm. and a diameter of 1.2 cm. Leaves are characterized as a simple blade, alternate, spiral and ex‐stipulate; petioles are 2–5 mm long, pubescent and channelled. Leaf blades are glabrous, coriaceous, fleshy, greenish to yellowish, shining, broadly ovate, width 7–8.5 cm, length 9–11 cm; base cordate; apex acuminate; margin is entire, narrowly recurved; venation reticulate, 7–9 veins in two or three pairs coming from the midrib, one pair elevating from base. The inflorescence is an axillary spike up to 5.5 cm long. The male inflorescence forms a cylindrical pendulous catkin of 10 cm in length and 2 cm in diameter. Female spikes are also cylindrical, pendulous; length 2.5–4 cm and diameter 0.5 cm. Individual flowers are very minute and unisexual, reduced, consisting of a couple of stamens and stigmas inserted into the axil of each bract. The bracts are orbicular, peltate, arranged in a thickly crowded spiral series. The mature inflorescence is strongly aromatic. Fruiting spikes are 3–5 cm in length, orange and drupping, entrenched on the rachis of the mature inflorescence. 34 , 35

4. VERNACULAR NAME
Vernacular names in Indian languages

Sanskrit: Tambool, Mukhbhushan, Nagavalli, Varnalata, Nagavallari

Hindi, Bengali, Urdu: Paan

Telugu: Nagballi, Tamalapaku

Tamil: Vetrilai

Gujarati: Nagarbael

Marathi: Vidyache pan

Malayalam: Vettilakkoti, Vettila

Kannada: Veeleya, Veeleyada yele, Vilya, Villayadel

Konkani: Phodi paan

Other Asian languages

English: Betle, Betle pepper, Betle‐vine

Vietnamese: Tråu

Khmer: Maluu

Mon: Plu

Thai: Plue, Pelu

Persian: Burg‐e‐Tanbol

Chamorro: Papulu

Javanese: Suruh, Sirih, Bodeh

Arabic: Tanbol

Sakai: Jerak

Semang: Seresa, Be, Cabe

Sinhalese: Bulath

Jakun: Kerekap, Kenayek

Malay: Daun sirih, Sirih hudang, Sirih Carang, Sirih melayu

Kapampangan: Bulung samat 36 , 37

Go to:
5. DISTRIBUTION AND CULTIVATION
The betel vine is believed to have originated in Malaysia. 38 The plant is widely grown in forests that are generally damp and also in hot and moist climatic conditions of India and many other countries in South and South East Asia, viz. China and Vietnam. Piper betle is believed to have first emerged in tropical Asia and then spread to East Africa and Madagascar. Betel is widely grown in India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, Vietnam, Thailand, Laos, Kampuchea, Philippine Islands, Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, Malay Peninsula and many countries in Southeast Asia and is known to have a long history, mentioning the presence of the betel plant over 2000 years. 39 Figure 2 presents the worldwide distribution of the species. In India, the plant is found in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and Tamilnadu. 40 , 41 , 42 About a hundred betel plant varieties are found all over the world,among them, 40 are grown in India, along with 30 are grown in Bangladesh and West Bengal. 43 Various types of Piper betle are found across the world, for instance, Magadhi, Kauri, Meetha, Salem, Venmony, Bangla, Banarasi, Kapoori, Kasi, Sanchi, Mysore, Desavari, Ghanagete and Bagerhati according to their size, colour and aroma. 44

Piper betle is generally propagated asexually by cutting stems rather than germinating seeds. 45 It needs a compatible tree or long support for its creeping habit. Betel vine cultivation is a very typical type of farming. For betel cultivation, the best choices are highlands and especially fertile sandy or sandy clay or sandy loam soil with a well drainage system and a pH range of 5.6–8.2, thus, saline and alkali soils where water logging are a problem is not suitable; about 2250–4750 mm rainfall, relative humidity 40–80% and temperature range 15–40°C are considered suitable. In Bangladesh, farmers prepare a special garden called ‘barouj’ which is fenced with bamboo sticks and coconut leaves and on top of the fench is covered with paddy leaves to grow betel. The farming land is well dug into furrows of approximately 10–15 m long, 75 cm wide and 75 cm deep. The furrows are thoroughly manured with cow dung, rotten farmyard manure, oil cakes, leaves and wood ash. After proper dressing, the cuttings are planted at the beginning of the monsoon, in the months of May to June. Then, the plants are parallelly arranged in rows with a distance of two feet between each plant and are bound with a string around upright sticks of split bamboo or short plants for support. Proper shade and frequent irrigation are necessary in areas where rainfall is lower about 1500–1700 mm; regular watering is required in summer and watering every 3–4 days is sufficient in winter, and a proper drainage system is mandatory at the time of rainy season for the successful cultivation of this crop. After 1 year of planting, the leaves of the plant turn out to be ready for plucking, and the production of betel leaf from the barouj lasts for more than a few years from the time of planting. 41 , 43 , 46

Go to:
6. ECONOMIC STATUS
In the Indian climate, the female plants of Piper betle rarely produce flowers or fruit. Betel vines are cultivated and harvested mainly for their heart‐shaped green leaves. 41 This crop has a vast economic potentiality which can be effectively recognized by the piece of evidence that more or less 15–20 million of people in India have the habit of using betel leaves regularly 47 not only that, there are more than 2 billion people from many other countries who are recognized as regular users of betel leaves from all over the world. 48 Most importantly, the economic status of betel leaves is dependent on the physical character of the end products in the worldwide market. The betel leaf and products produced in different forms such as powder, capsules, liquid and various types of value‐added products are available on a broad spectrum in the market as beverages, in oral care, pharmaceutical products and cosmetics. 41 The annual turnover national income is Rs 7000–10,000 million, and from this, the state, West Bengal, gains an income of 800–1000 million rupees per year. The leaves were exported to various countries around the world where the plant is not grown naturally or the local supply could not meet the requirements. Betel leaves are generally exported to Hong Kong, Pakistan, Italy, Bahrain, Canada, Great Britain, Kuwait, Saudi Arab, Nepal and several other countries in Europe. 47 , 49

Go to:
7. TRADITIONAL AND ETHNO‐MEDICINAL USE
Traditional medicine has played a crucial role in the health care of the rural and urban people. 246 , 247 , 248 Ethno‐medico‐botanicals have been used across almost all the cultures worldwide against an array of human medical conditions. 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 The use of betel leaf alone and with a combination of other plants or medicines for better therapeutic effects is mentioned in the Ayurvedic literature, which was almost 1400 BC ago. 54 Atharved, the ancient Vedic literature, mentioned the usefulness of the betel plant against numerous diseases at about 3000–2500 BC before. 55 Saptasira, the Vedic name of the leaves of betel, is mentioned in the Kamasutra of Vatsyayan as having aphrodisiac properties. 44 In the ayurvedic and Unani system of medicine, the betel plant is used as an anthelmintic, appetite stimulant, vermifuge, astringent, diarrhoea, aphrodisiac, breath freshener, carminative, cardiac tonic, dentifrice, in the prevention of diuretic emmenagogues, induction and increase of menstrual flow, laxative, strengthen gums, nerve tonic and also in the treatment of urinary disorders. Betel leaves are mostly chewed by about 200 million people on a regular basis throughout the south Asia and western part of the Pacific basin in a special shape of packets known as ‘Betel quid’, which is prepared from Piper betle leaves brushed with burnt lime and contain few pieces of areca nut, flavours, often cardamom or cloves, are added with or without tobacco according to choice. 56 Chaveerach et al. stated that the betel leaf is a most important material in Thai ceremonies. Elderly people chew betel leaves to prepare quid. In weddings, the family members of the bridegroom place money along with the betle leaves in a bowl, which together is known as khun maak. The ethnic group Kui, from the southern division of North East Thailand, uses betel leaf (locally, raam phi taan) in the ‘Spirit dancing’ ceremony to chase away evil spirits or fend off bad luck from the patients from the family or the village. They use betel leaves as stimulant, exhilarant, antiseptic and antioxidant, to treat kidney inflammation and thirst resulting from diabetes, strength to stomach, as expectorant for asthma, coughs and bronchitis, and antiflatulent element. 34 Decoction of P. betle leaves used to prevent body odour and treat diarrhoea, sore throat, skin allergies and fluor albus, leaves are cooked and added to vegetable soup. 57 In Southeast Asia, Betel chewing with its associated discoloration of the teeth is the ascriptions of the teeth blackening practice related to sexual maturation and becoming a full member of society in Masticans. 58 In the Laleng community, people use betel leaf to chew and at the sociocultural festival. They oil the leaf with mustard oil and place it on the naval area to relieve liver pain. 59 The Rabha community of Mataikhar forest, Assam, the Torajanese, the Bugis community and Lakshadweep people also use betel leaf for chewing and in religious festivals. 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 People in Parsa district, Nepal, chew betel leaf or mix leaf juice with hot water, honey or milk mild stimulant, cure worm, remedy for bad breath and provides mouth refreshment, improve digestion, strengthen teeth and gums, palate cleaner, treatment of nervous pains and exhaustion, ease of urination, analgesic, reduce cough and cold. 64 The ethno‐medicinal uses of P. betle in the area and community are listed in Table 1.
8. PHYTOCHEMICAL PROFILE
Piper betle is one of the extensively investigated plants for its various phytochemical constituents present in it, and the study revealed that the plant contains a wide range of phytochemicals that are biologically active. Compound concentrations depend on the different varieties of the plant, season, climate and may geographical location and also might be influenced by various factors such as soil, humidity, agronomic practices, rainfall, season and type of plant. 65 The main phytochemical constituents of the essential oil of the betel leaf are mainly phenols and terpenes. 66 The phenol content varies by gender, total phenols are three times higher in male plants, and the thiocyanate content is two times higher compared to female plans. Leaf quality is basically dependent on the phenol content; more phenol content comes with better leaf quality. 67 The typical pungent aroma of the betel leaves is the result of the phenols present in them. Preliminary photochemical studies of aqueous and methanol extracts of betel leaves revealed the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, sterols, phenols, glycosides, saponins and terpenoids. 68 Syahidah et al. also identified alkaloids, phenols, flavonoids, saponins, steroids, tannins, terpenoids and glycosides from qualitative analysis of the methanolic extract of the betel leaves. 175 Leaves also contain bitter compounds (0.7–2.6%). 2 Terpenoids and their acetates, including cadinene, 1,8‐cineole, chavicol, chavibetol, safrole, camphene, limonene, caryophyllene, pinene, carvacrol, allylpyrocatechol and eugenol, are present in P. betle as the main phenols. 2 , 69 A recent work with the leaves was found to contain starch, diastases, sugars (0.8 to 1.8%) and an essential oil in an amount of 4.2%. 70 The presence of tannins and steroidal components was revealed by phytochemical investigation on leaves. 71 The main components of betel leaf oil are safrole (48.7%), chavibetol acetate (12.5%) allylpyrocate choldiacetate (34.0%), along with ρ–cymene, 4‐terpinol, eugenol, β‐caryophyllene. 72 There are two sesquiterpenes, cadinene and caryophyllene and safrole (52.7%), eugenyl acetate (5.8%), allylpyrocatecholdiacetate (15.4%) and eugenol (6.4%) are also reported as the main elements of the essential oil of the P. betle leaf from Sri Lanka. 67 The leaves were also found to produce an alkaloid, namely arakene, which possesses properties similar to those of cocaine. The chemical compositions of essential oil differ in different parts: leaf, stem, stalk and root contain safrole, while fruits contain β ‐phellandrene. Younger leaves of betel contain more amount of essential oil. 73 Phytochemical analysis of two varieties of betel leaves, Kamarvetrilai and Kumbakonamvetrilai, confirmed cardiac glycosides, acids and steroids along with tannins, saponins and flavonoids. 74 In another experiment, four cultivars of P. betle—Banarasi, Calcutta, Kammar and Kumbakonam—showed positive results in tannin, flavonoid and terpenoid tests,plobatannins found in the Banarasi cultivar, Banarasi and Kammar gave positive results for saponins,cardiac glycosides found in the Banarasi and Kumbakonam cultivars. 75 Pipercerebrosides A and B are two new sphingolipids isolated and identified by NMR (Nuclear magnetic resonance) spectroscopy of betel leaf extract. 76 GC‐MS (Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry) studies identified all compounds that can be divided as monoterpene (α‐thujene, α‐pinene, camphene, sabinene, myrcene, β‐phellandrene, α‐terpinene, (e)‐β‐ocimene, 1,8‐cineole/eucalyptol, γ‐terpinene, terpinolene, linalool, terpinen‐4‐ol, α‐terpineol), sesquiterpenes (δ‐elemene, α‐copaene, β‐copaene, β‐elemene, e‐β‐caryophyllene, γ‐elemene, β‐selinene, aromadendrene, α‐humulene, germacrene d, α‐selinene, γ‐muurolene, bicyclogermacrene, α‐muurolene, cis‐β guaiene, δ‐cadinene, palustrol, spathulenol, caryophyllene oxide, globulol, viridiflorol, cubenol, α‐cadinol), and phenylpropane (estragole/methyl chavicol, chavicol, anethole/isoestragole, safrole, chavicol, acetate, eugenol, methyl eugenol, eugenol acetate). 77 Betel vine also contains dotriacontanoic acid, stearic acid, piperlonguminine, hentriacontane, n‐triacontanol, pentatriacontane, triotnacontane, isoeugenol, allylpyrocatecholdiacetate, α‐pinene, β‐sitosteryl palmitate, 1, 8‐cineol, ursolic acid, β‐sitosterol, β‐pinene, sitosterol, ursolic acid 3β‐acetate and stigmasterol. Betel roots possess ursonic acid, piperlonguminine, stearic acid, β‐sitosteryl palmitate, β‐sitosterol, 3β‐acetyl ursolic acid, 4‐allyl resorcinol, aristololactam A II and stigmast‐4‐en‐3, 6‐dione. The betel stems were found to have stigmast‐4‐en‐3, piperine, piperlonguminine, piperdardine, dehydropipernonaline, guineensine, 6‐dione, aristololactam A‐II, pellitorine, 4‐allyl resorcinol, syringaresinol‐O‐β‐D‐glucopyranoside, N‐isobutyl‐2E,4E‐dodecadienamide, pinoresinol, piperolein‐B, cepharadione A, dotriacontanoic acid, β‐daucosterol, tritriacontane, β‐sitosterol, α‐ethyl glucoside (2E,4E)‐N‐isobutyl‐7‐(3’,4'‐methylenedioxyphenyl)‐2,4‐heptadienamide, 23‐hydroxyursan‐12‐en‐28‐oic acid, (2S)‐4'‐hydroxy‐ 2,3‐dihydrofl avonone‐7‐O‐β‐D‐glucoside and β‐sitosterol‐3‐O‐β‐D‐glucoside‐6'‐O‐palmitate. 78 , 79 , 80 , 81 Gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC–MS) analysis of fresh and cured leaves of the essential oil of P. betle var Bangla fresh and cured leaves revealed a total of thirty‐three phytochemicals and a total of thirty volatile components, respectively, with high abundance of estragole, eugenol, linalool, anethole, α‐copaene, chavicol and caryophyllene. 1 Very recently, Islam et al. studied volatile oils from five varieties of betel such as Bangla, Misti, Khasi, Sanchi and Bari and found a total of 101 volatile oil compounds, which are much higher in number than previous reports with 50 compounds identified for the first time. 82 Table 2 represents the phytochemical constituents of P. betle. Figure 3 represents the chemical structures of some phytochemicals reported from the species.
9. PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
The following section summarizes the various pharmacological attributes of P. betle (Table 3).

9.1. Antitumour/anticancer/antiproliferative activity
One of the promising therapeutic strategy to inhibit cancer cell proliferation is to facilitate apoptosis. In cancer research, finding apoptosis‐inducing agents derived from plant sources has become popular due to the fact that existing anti‐apoptotic drugs, many of which are derived from chemical substances, often fail to combat cancer development and progression. 83 In addition to the destruction of rapidly proliferating cancer cells, many anticancer compounds also kill normal cells in the body. Cancer can be treated with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, but both can cause numerous adverse health effects, and in many instances, cancer cells develop resistance to anticancer medications. However, of late few compounds obtained from natural sources, which cannot even be synthesized in the most advanced chemical synthesis laboratories, have shown great promise in the cancer treatment. 84 , 85 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89

The first report of antitumour activity of P. betle came from Rao. He studied the activity of the aqueous extract prepared from leaves in benzo(a)pyrene‐induced tumours in buccal pouches of hamsters. The result revealed that the betel leaf extract was very effective in inhibiting preneoplastic and neoplastic changes; partial and complete tumour suppression was also observed in both short‐term (10 days) and long‐term (6 months) treatment. 90 Again, the effect of the aqueous extract of leaves on dimethyl benz (a) anthracene (DMBA)‐ induced carcinogenesis in the mammary grand of Holtzman rats was evaluated. When leaf extract was administered orally at higher doses, it showed the inhibitory result on tumour emergence. 91 Bhide et al. investigated the result of the alcoholic extract of betel leaves and its few constituents (hydroxychavicol, α‐tocopherol, eugenol and β‐carotene) against benzo[a]pyrene‐induced neoplasia in the forestomach of Swiss male mice. The leaf extract of betel and the constituents present in it were able to decrease the number of papilloma, and the highest protection was shown by α‐tocopherol and β‐carotene. 92 A study of the effect of leaf extracts on the carcinogenic and mutagenic actions of nitrosamines, 4‐(N‐nitrosomethylamino)‐1‐(3‐pyridyl)‐1‐butanone (NNK), which is one of the most potent chemicals specific to tobacco, was carried out in mice. The result showed that leaf extract and hydroxychavicol were able to reduce the tumour‐forming efficacy of NNK by approximately 25%, and inhibited the decrease in vitamin A levels by the induction activity of NNK in plasma and liver. 93 Azuie et al. studied the tumour inhibition activity of the betel leaf and its constituents in 7,12‐dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) induced skin tumours in mice and found inhibition of tumour formation by 83–84%. 72 They also investigated oral carcinogenesis induced by methyl (acetoxymethyl) nitrosamine in hamster, extract treatment resulted in inhibition of tumour incidence, reduction of tumour burden, extension of tumour latency period, and regression of established and honest tumours, suggesting that betel can be used to develop a potential chemopreventive agent for human oral cancer. 94 In another experiment, Bhide et al. showed that the incidence of virus‐induced and 7–12‐dimethylbenz (a) anthracene‐induced rodent mammary gland tumours can be reduced by 75% and tumour burden by >90% by the administration of the ethanol extract of the leaves. 95 The methanol extract prepared from the leaves was able to exhibit antitumour activity in terms of cancer chemoprevention in Raji cells induced by 12‐O‐hexadecanoylphorbol‐13‐acetate. 96 The aqueous extract of leaves and the ethanol extract of leaves in KB cell line (human epithelial carcinoma cells) 97 and the ethanol extract in the breast cancer T47D cell line 98 exhibited cytotoxic and antiproliferative activity with IC50 values of 29.5 ± 0.3 and 55.2 µg/ml, respectively. Abrahim et al. evaluated the anticancer activity of extracts of water, methanol, ethyl acetate and hexane from leaves in the MCF‐7 breast cancer cell line. Ethyl acetate and hexane extracts showed a dose‐dependent inhibitory effect with IC50 values of 65.00 and 163.30 μg/ml, respectively. 99 The anticancer benefits of betel leaves and bioguided fractionation were evaluated for prostate cancer management and found that hydroxychavicol is the most potent component to inhibit tumour formation in the PC 3 cell line. 100 In another experiment, Widowati et al. found that the aqueous extract of P. betle root can effectively reduce cell proliferation by 2.8% and induce apoptosis by 9.45% in the T47D cell line (human ductal breast epithelial tumour) 101 ,ethanolic extract of leaves can inhibit the growth of HeLa cervical cancer cells with an IC50 value of 7.13 µg/ml and exhibit apoptotic activity with an IC50 value of 12.5 µg/ml (95.87%). 102 The in vitro anticancer efficacy of hydroxychavicol‐containing leaf extract showed sensitivity to androgen‐independent human prostate cancer cells (22Rv1> C4‐2> PC‐3> DU14) and the activity of P. betle in BALB/c nude mice y injected with PC‐3‐luc cells by inhibiting growth and proliferation through ROS (Reactive oxygen species) generation and caspase‐dependent pathway. 9 An experiment with the MTT assay, 88.7% cell toxicity and 11.4% cell death were observed in the lung cancer cell line (A549) applying acetone extract of betel leaves. 103 Shah et al. studied the tumour inhibition assay of B16F10 melanoma in mice (C57BL/6) with leaves ethyl acetate, petroleum ether, aqueous and ethanol extracts. The result revealed that the ethyl acetate extract showed the highest dose‐dependent reduction in tumour size. 104 Recently, Boontha et al. used a crude ethanolic extract of betel leaf to assess anticancer activity in human breast cancer cells (MCF‐7) and found that the extract showed cytotoxicity with an IC50 value of 114.3 µg/ml, suppressed cell migration at a dose of 25 µg/ml and developed a transdermal patch containing 0.03% extract. 105 Another in vitro experiment with leaf extract containing hydroxychavicol in pancreatic cancer cell lines, viz. MIA PaCa‐2, PANC‐1, L929, INT407, NIH‐3T3, Vero and HEK293 cells exhibited inhibition of cell proliferation and epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition in cell lines, invasion and migration of cells through generalized gene repression, induced DNA damage, and also resulted in mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis through the JNK pathway and the caspase‐mediated pathway. 106

9.2. Analgesic/anti‐inflammatory/antinociceptive activity
The term ‘inflammation’ refers to the complex pharmacological process of the tissues in response to harmful stimuli viz. damaged cells, pathogens or irritants, which is characterized by swelling, warmth, redness and pain. 107 There has been a growing interest in developing safe and effective drugs for pain and inflammation from both academia and the pharmaceutical industry. 108 By different types of inflammatory model tests, researchers found that food supplements could be considered as safe natural analgesics which act as adjuvant for various clinical pain and inflammation by modulation of TRPM8/TRPA1 channels and endogenous opioids signalling pathways. 109 The antinociceptive activity of P. betle was investigated using hot and cold‐water extracts of various concentrations in tail flick test, hot plate test and formalin test models of cross‐bred albino mice. The cold extract showed higher antinociceptive activity than the hot extract via the opioid‐mediated pathway. 110 The anti‐inflammatory efficacy of the betel leaf ethanol extract was studied in arthritic rats with a complete Freund adjuvant‐induced model. Ethanol extract was found to reveal anti‐inflammatory and anti‐arthritic activity by down‐regulating nitric oxide generation in a dose‐dependent manner compared to positive control dexamethasone. 111 Pin et al. investigated the anti‐inflammatory activity of P. betle leaves using various solvents (ethanol, ethyl acetate, water and hexane) by in vitro inhibition assay of hyaluronidase (HYA), xanthine oxidase (XOD) and lipoxygenase (LOX). The extracts did not show a good inhibitory effect in the HYA assay, but showed a greater inhibition of more than 70% in the XOD and LOX assay. The order of increasing inhibitory activity of the extracts was aqueous < ethyl acetate < ethanol < hexane. 112 In another experiment, betel leaves methanol extract was used to study anti‐inflammatory activity with the carrageenan‐induced hind paw oedema model and analgesic activity was studied using hot plate, formalin test and writhing test. Administration of the extract significantly (p < 0.05) reduced carrageenan‐induced paw oedema and reduced the number of acetic acid‐induced writhing and formalin‐induced licks in a dose‐dependent manner. 113 De et al. also observed a reduced writhing response through modulation of the arachidonic acid pathway in the acetic acid‐induced writhing test on Swiss Albino mice using ethanolic extract of leaves. 114 The analgesic effect of the betel leaf was evaluated using the heat conduction process and the hot plate method of the eddy in mice and rat models. Dose‐dependent analgesic effect was observed by increasing the latency period. 115 The in vitro anti‐inflammatory effects of several varieties of P. betle leaf methanolic extracts were evaluated in the cell line (RAW 264.7) induced by E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Five varieties among the nine varieties showed significant anti‐inflammatory activity. 116 Another experiment was carried out in which leaf essential oil was used to evaluate the anti‐inflammatory activity of P. betle using the detection of MMP‐2 (metalloproteinase‐2) and MMP‐9 (metalloproteinase‐9) using the gelatin zymography method in vitro. An effective anti‐inflammatory activity with 85% inhibition was observed. 117

9.3. Neuropharmacological property
Numerous neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease as well as epilepsy, migraine and essential tremors have caused severe human morbidity and mortality. 118 , 119 , 120 Depression, anxiety disorders and cognitive impairment are the most common comorbid diagnoses in neurological diseases. Treatment options include medications, cognitive‐behavioural therapy, somatic interventions or electroconvulsive therapy. Although oral antidepressants have some advantages, they also present few limitations like side effects, interaction with other medications, incompatibility and inefficiency. To find a better and safer alternative treatment of neurological conditions, natural compounds of plant origin such as terpenes, alkaloids, flavonoids, lipids and phenolic acids are being studies extensively. 87

9.3.1. Antidepressant activity The antidepressant activity of the ethanol extract of betel leaves was evaluated in Swiss albino mice using the forced swim test and the tail suspension test. Oral administration of leaf extract showed notable antidepressant activity by reducing the duration of immobility compared to imipramine‐treated control mice. 121 Gulhane et al. in their experiment also found that the hydroalcoholic extract from betel leaves is capable of controlling depression by reducing immobility time in the tail suspension test and forced swim test, when imipramine was used as standard drug. 122 The volatile oil obtained from the P. betle fruit also showed a significant antidepressant effect in albino mice using the forced swim method compared to the standard antidepressant drug fluoxetine. 252
9.3.2. Anti‐anxiety activity Anxiety is characterized as being an unpleasant emotional state for which the cause cannot be identified or perceived as uncontrollable, which impairs efficiency and induces insomnia, as well as resulting in a wide range of medically unexplained symptoms. 123 The hydroalcoholic extract of P. betle leaves was used to assess antianxiety activity in Swiss albino mice. A gradual dose‐dependent improvement was observed using the light/dark exploration test and an increase in plus compared to the control group receiving diazepam as standard in the antianxiety model. 122
9.3.3. Antistress activity The effect of P. betle was evaluated to understand its potential role in stress‐mediated sleep disruption mediated by early exposure to life. For this study, betel leaf ethanol extract was administered under post‐fertilization stress induced by dexamethasone (DEX) in zebrafish larvae. The results showed improved levels of melatonin‐related behavioural gene expression (MT1, MT2, aanat1 and aanat2) and stress‐related gene expression (NF‐kB) similar to positive control melatonin. 124
9.3.4. Anticholinesterase activity and against Alzheimer's disease The neurotransmitter acetylcholine is cleaved by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BchE); therefore, inhibition of AchE and BchE is important to enhance brain activity. Alzheimer’s disease, which is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes dementia, impaired memory and impaired cognitive function in elderly people, can be managed by the application of cholinesterase inhibitor drugs. The in vitro anticholinesterase activity of P. betle was investigated in human neuroblastoma cells (SH‐SY5Y) by studying viability by reducing the leakage of 3‐(4,5‐dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl)‐2,5‐diphenyltetrazolium bromide and lactate dehydrogenase. Both the aqueous extract and the ethanol extract exhibited strong inhibitory activity on AchE and BchE. 125 Dalai et al. also evaluated the inhibitory efficacy of standardized betel leaf methanol extract, containing hydroxychavicol and chlorogenic acid against AchE and BchE. Hydroxychavicol was found to have a more potent cholinergic effect than chlorogenic acid, but a combination of both (1:1) showed the highest inhibitory activity with an IC50 of 21.23  ±  0.33 μg/ml and 45.55 ±  1.89 μg/ml against AchE and BchE, respectively. 126
The effects of P. betle leaf extract on memory and learning ability were evaluated in Wistar rats with aluminium chloride‐induced (AlCl3) Alzheimer’s disease. Two tests, the passive avoidance test and the Morris water maze test, showed that the administration of the aqueous extract of leaves reduced the mean escape latency period and improved spatial memory retention in the same way as in rivastigmine‐treated mice. 127 These investigations suggest that P. betle could be an excellent anticholinergic agent with potential in the therapeutic management of Alzheimer's disease.

9.4. Nootropic effect
The hydroalcoholic extract of P. betle leaves was shown to have nootropic effect by the experiment in which the extract was administered to Swiss albino mice and the result showed an increase in discrimination index in the object recognition test. 128 In another experiment, the nootropic effect of P. betle in scopolamine‐induced amnesia in albino rats was evaluated using the Y‐maze test and it was found that the aqueous extract of leaves can reverse the effect against amnesia with a significant decrease in retention latency, a major decrease in the inflection ratio. 129

9.5. Antioxidant activity
Formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is one of the major markers in any disease pathology. An antioxidant acts as a protective barrier against ROS, which causes chronic and degenerative diseases. 130 The main health problems such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders may be caused by the formation of free radicals. Antioxidants are very beneficial because they scavenge these free radicals and help prevent these kinds of disorders because they reduce the oxidative injury of cell proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. 131 The extract of the inflorescence of P. betle was found to scavenge free radical (H2O2, superoxide, hydroxyl radical) with a 50% inhibitory concentration using an in vitro assay. 2,2‐diphenyl‐1‐picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), superoxide and hydroxyl radical scavenging activity was calculated in a riboflavin/light/NBT (9 nitro blue tetrazolium) system and inhibition of lipid peroxidation induced by FeSO4 using the aqueous extract of leaves of three varieties of betel in egg yolk (Kauri, Ghanagete, Bagerhati). The antioxidant capacity was observed in the order of Bagerhati < Ghanagete < Kauri. 132 Arambewela et al., in the DPPH free radical scavenging assay, found that the free radical scavenging effects decreased in the order of cold ethanolic extract > essential oil > hot water extract of leaves. 133 Significant antioxidant efficacy of betel leaves methanol, water, petroleum ether and ethyl acetate extracts observed using the in vitro DPPH assay and the TBARS (Thiobarbituric acid reactive substance assay), hydroxyl radical scavenging assay. 32 The leaf aqueous extract in DPPH, free radical scavenging assay showed 83% antioxidant activity in the human ductal breast epithelial tumour (T47D) cell line 98 and the ethanolic extract of leaves scavenged more than 50% free radical in the HeLa cell line using the superoxide dismutase activity assay. 102 Jaiswal et al. performed an antioxidant assay using methanol, ethanol, acetone, ethyl acetate and distilled water extract from betel leaves (Banarasi, safeda, Calcutta, Cuttack, Desibagla, Maharashtra and Sofia varieties). The highest antioxidant activity was observed in the FRAP assay (Ferric reducing antioxidant power) and the ABTS (2,2′‐Azinobis‐(3‐Ethylbenzthiazolin‐6‐Sulfonic Acid) assay of Banarasi safeda and photochemiluminescence assay for the Calcutta variety. 134 The DPPH radical scavenging assay in human breast cancer MCF‐7 cells using crude ethanolic extract of leaves showed antioxidant activity with (IC50) of 30.0 ± 0.1 µg/ml. 105 used different solvent extracts of leaves (ethanol, ethyl acetate, hexane +petroleum ether and aqueous extract of leaves) and found potential antioxidant properties of all extracts in all assays (DPPH, reducing power activity and hydrogen peroxide scavenging assay) in a concentration‐dependent manner 135 Ethanolic extract from leaves using the in vitro ORAC (oxygen radical absorbance capacity) assay 136 and methanol extract of leaves using in vitro nitric oxide, hydroxyl radical and reducing power assay, ferric ion RPA (Robotic Process Automation) method 137  showed potential antioxidant activity through free radical scavenging.

9.6. Hepatoprotective property
The hepatoprotective activity of P. betle was investigated using a model of ethanol‐intoxicated hepatotoxic injury in the Wistar rat. Oral administration of betel leaf ethanolic extract at a dose of 300 mg/kg bw was found to show the highest activity, namely decreased AST (aspartate aminotransferase), TBARS (thiobarbituric acid reactive substances), ALT (alanine aminotransferase) and lipid hydroperoxides; improved non‐enzymatic antioxidants such as reduced GSH (glutathione), vitamin E and vitamin C, and free radical detoxifying enzymes such as CAT (Catalase), SOD (Superoxide dismutase) and GSH peroxidase in kidney and liver of rats. 138 Treatment with betel leaf extract improved D‐galactosamine intoxication induced by oxidative stress in Wistar rats. The extract at a dose of 200 mg/kg bw improved antioxidant levels such as lipid hydroperoxidase (LOOH), SOD, GSH, GSH peroxidise, vitamin E and vitamin C,decreased TBARS, hydroperoxidase and liver marker enzymes such as ALT, AST, alkaline phosphate (ALP) and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP). 139 To evaluate the hepatoprotective activity of P. betle, Young et al. induced liver fibrosis with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and corn oil in Wistar rats. The leaf aqueous extract was found to attenuate liver fibrosis by inhibiting AST and ALT activities, attenuating total glutathione S‐transferase activity (GST) and decreasing the expression of a‐smooth muscle actin (α‐SMA). The extract also enhanced the expression of active matrix metalloproteinase‐2 (MMP2) induced by SOD and CAT activities and inhibited the level of TIMP2 (Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2). 140 Manigauha et al. also studied the effect of ethanolic extract from betel leaves against CCl4 induced liver damage in Wistar rats. Administration of leaf extract significantly reduced serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase (SGOT), serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase (SGPT), (ALP), acid phosphatase and lipid peroxidation, it also improved CAT, SOD, GSH in the liver of rats. 141 Altered levels of elevated serum AST, ALT, ALP, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), GGTP, bilirubin,TBARS, LOOH, protein carbonyl, conjugated dienes, reduced SOD, CAT, GST, vitamin C and vitamin E were observed when liver dysfunction induced with cadmium chloride in Wister rats treated with ethanol extract of betel leaves. 142 Ethanol extract prepared from betel leaves was also found to mitigate methotrexate‐induced hepatotoxicity in rats (Sprague‐Dawley) by reducing ALT, AST and ALP levels. Histological studies showed that the extract reduced central vein dilation, leukocyte infiltration and normalization of the hepatocellular architecture,the extract also reduced LPO levels and increased the depleted GSH level and SOD, CAT and GPx (glutathione peroxidase) by methotrexate. 143

9.7. Antiulcerogenic property
The prolonged use of non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs (NSAID) is one of the main causes of peptic ulcer, and there are other factors such as alcohol abuse and acute/chronic stress. Majumder et al. evaluated the antiulcerogenic efficacy of P. betle against gastric injury induced by indomethacin in Sprague‐Dawley rats. Oral administration of ethanol leaf extract at 200 mg / kg bw of dose for ten days showed noteworthy protection against gastric lesions, increase in SOD and CAT activity, amplification of mucus quantity, increase in hexosamine and total thiol group quantity, but reduced the amount of damaged oxidative protein and peroxidized lipid level, increased free radical proving the antiulcerogenic potential of betel by antioxidant mechanism. 144 The authors in another experiment also found that the ethanolic extract of betel leaves can protect NSAID‐induced ulcer in Charles Foster rats by increasing the antioxidative factors, mucus and the total gastric tissue sulfhydryl group. 145 The ethanol extract of betel leaves and the isolated compound allylpyrocatechol were found to have excellent healing properties against indomethacin‐induced stomach ulceration in rats (Sprague‐Dawley). The extract reduced the ulcer index by 93.4%, accelerated ulcer healing, improved the mucin content of gastric tissues, showed normal levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) and protein, and also increased levels of SOD and CAT levels. 146 , 147 The antiulcer activity of P. betle was also investigated in HCl‐ethanol, acute stress and pylorus ligation models in Wistar rats and Swiss albino mice using the hydroalcoholic extract of leaves. The results showed a decrease in ulcer index, gastric fluid volume, and an increase in gastric pH. An experiment was carried out using HAE (hot aqueous extract) and CEE (cold ethanolic extract) of betel leaves to assess gastroprotective efficacy in gastric ulcer induced by ethanol in crossbreed albino rats. When HAE and CEE were administered orally, they showed remarkable protection against gastric damage induced by absolute ethyl alcohol in a dose‐dependent manner by increasing the adhesion of the mucus content to the wall of the gastric mucosa and inhibiting the volume of gastric acid. 31 All these experiments proved the traditional claim that P. betle could be an excellent gastroprotective and antiulcerogenic agent in therapeutics.

9.8. Antihyperglycaemic activity
The antihyperglycaemic efficacy of P. betle was investigated in streptozotocin‐diabetic albino Wistar rats. Leaf suspension was administered orally at a dose of 75 and 150 mg/kg body weight, for 30 days and the glucose level in plasma and glycosylated haemoglobin, liver hexokinase and gluconeogenic enzyme activities were tested. The result showed a decrease in blood glucose level from 205.00 mg/dl to 151.30 mg/dl, reduced glycosylated haemoglobin level, decreased liver fructose‐1,6‐bisphosphatase and glucose‐6‐phosphatase activity and also increased liver hexokinase in a dose‐dependent mode. 149 The effect of betel leaf methanolic extract on in vitro protein glycation was investigated using a BSA (Bovine Seram Albumin)‐glucose model. The methanol extract inhibited glucose‐induced protein glycation in different stages and also inhibited the dose‐dependent modification of the thiol group and carbonyl formation. The early stage or the formation of amadori products was identified by haemoglobin‐δ‐gluconolactone, middle stage or the formation of the oxidative cleavage product was identified by BSA‐methylglyoxal, and the last stage or the production of advanced glycation ends (AGE) was identified by BSA‐glucose. 150 Fatmawati and Shimizu, by in vitro aldose reductase assay, identified that the ethanolic extract of betel leaves can inhibit human recombinant aldose reductase (HRAR), which is the key compound in the polyol signalling pathway in converting glucose to sorbitol,therefore, long‐term diabetic complications develop contradictory with the value of IC50 18.8 μg/ml. 136

9.9. Antihyperlipidaemic activity
The Wistar rat brain when treated with ethanol showed that lipid peroxidation, lipids and turbulence in antioxidant protection are increased. Different doses of administration of the aqueous extract of the P. betle leaf showed improvement in toxicity symptoms. Co‐administration of the aqueous extract at the 300 mg/kg dose rate showed the highest activity and appreciably abridged the levels of lipids such as phospholipids, free fatty acids and cholesterol, and also reduced markers for lipid peroxidation such as TBARS and hydroperoxides, and increased antioxidants, such as SOD, reduced GSH, vitamin E, vitamin C, CAT and GSH peroxidase. 151 The hypolipidaemic activity of betel leaf was evaluated in hyperlipidaemic rats fed a high‐fat diet. The leaf methanolic extract showed depletion in TC (total cholesterol), TG (triglycerides), LDL (low‐density lipoprotein) and VLDL (very low‐density lipoprotein‐cholesterol) activities in serum. 152

9.10. Anti‐atherogenic activity
Atherosclerosis is a major health problem, which subsequently leads to cardiovascular disease caused by hypercholesterolemia. Venkadeswaran et al. studied the anti‐atherogenic potential of the P. betle plant and the active constituents present in it in the Triton WR‐1339‐induced hypercholesterolaemic Wistar rat. The betel leaf ethanol extract at a dose of 500 mg/kg w and its constituent eugenol at a dose of 5 mg/kg wt for 7 days of administration ameliorated hypercholesterolemia‐induced high levels of TC, TG, LDL and VLDL and low levels of enzymatic and non‐enzymatic antioxidants as standard lipid lowering drug, lovastatin. 153 In another experiment, the authors fed Wistar rats an atherogenic diet and biochemical and histopathological experiments exhibited that the ethanolic leaf extract and the active constituent eugenol are capable of lowering the amount of TG, TC, LDL‐cholesterol and VLDL‐cholesterol in serum and liver tissue. The extract and eugenol also reduced AST, alkaline phosphatase, ALT, enzymes for lipid metabolization and lactate dehydrogenase in serum, decreased the antioxidant enzyme, and induces malondialdehyde in liver tissue and hemolysate. 154

9.11. Cardioprotective activity
The effectiveness of P. betle in cardioprotection was evaluated in rats with isoproterenol (ISP)‐induced myocardial infarction. Oral administration of betel leaf hydroalcoholic extract significantly modulated the haemodynamic of systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, mean arterial pressure (DAP, MAP and SAP) and parameters for ventricular function such as contractility (+LVdP/dt) and relaxation (LVdP/dt), heart rate (HR); the extract restored the level of catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), GSH and SOD, decreased leakage of creatine phosphokinase‐MB (CK‐MB) isoenzyme of and LDH, reduced lipid peroxidation in the heart showing a protection effect against ISP‐induced myocardial infarction. 155 Piper betle was found to prevent oxidative cardiac cell injury through an in vitro study using the rat heart cell line H9c2 incubated with H2O2. The leaf extracted using ethyl acetate and the isolated bioactive component eugenol protected against oxidative stress induced by H2O2, decreased intracellular ROS and apoptosis and improved the cellular defence system at a dose of 10 μg/ml. 156

9.12. Antifertility activity
The first report on the antifertility potential of P. betle was probably from Tewari et al., who found that the alcoholic extract of the betel stalk can reduce the number of pups; anti‐oestrogenic property recorded in adult male, female rats and rabbits. Gentle progestational action was also found in oestrogen‐primed immature rabbits with few types of follicle depressant in their regressive phase. 157 To evaluate the antifertility efficacy of P. betle, alcoholic extract of leaf stalks is administered orally to male Swiss albino mice at a dose of 500 mg initially for 30 days and after that a dose of 1000 mg/kg body weight for another 30 days per animal per day. After 60 days of treatment, fertility was reduced to 0%. The extract suppressed sperm mobility and cauda epididymal sperm count, reduced fructose content in the seminal vesicles and weights of reproductive organs, and also increased cholesterol in the testes. The altered parameters were found to recover after discontinuation of the extract, suggesting P. betle as a contraceptive agent without altering hormonal balance. 158 The antifertility efficacy of betel petiole extract was studied in female albino Wistar rats. Petiole ethyl alcohol extract at a dose of 100 mg/day/rat for 30 days showed a reduction in fertility, reproductive organ weights, oestrogen level, litter number, serum glucose concentration, acid phosphatase, SGOT and SGPT activity,increased cholesterol and ascorbic acid activity. The extract revealed that cholesterol was not used and there was no mobilization of ascorbic acid, irregular oestrus cycle and no change in haematological parameters. 159 The application of methanol and the aqueous extract of betel leaf extract on the female Wistar rat revealed an irregular and prolonged oestrous cycle, which results in infertility. 68 In silico study of the antifertility effect of P. betle root extract containing piperolactam A exhibited potential contraceptive activity with high binding affinity to the oestrogen and progesterone receptor (8.9 and 9.0 Kcal/mol, respectively), the binding site showed more hydrogen binding to the receptor than Rohitukine and OrgC. 160 Shah and Jhade studied the antifertility effect of the betel plant on adult female Wistar rats using the water, petroleum ether and ethanol extract of the whole plant. The results showed significant antifertility potential with anti‐implantation and abortifacient activity, reduced level of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), progesterone, anti‐oestrogenic activity and irregular oestrous cycle. 161 , 162
