Betelvine(Piper betle L.)

I. Subject
These test guidelines shall apply to all varieties and hybrids of Betelvine (Piper betle
L.) grown under open system of cultivation and closed (Boroj ) system of cultivation.
The open system of cultivation under natural condition is practiced in North Eastern and
Southern states. Betelvine is grown with arecanut (Areca catechu L.) and Sesbania
grandiflora as support crop for the vine.
Boroj is an artificially erected closed hut structure, the main frame work of which
is made of bamboo poles to a height of 2m. Its sides and roof are made of locally
available materials like jute stick, straw, grass banana leaf etc. For support of the vine,
jute sticks or sliced bamboo sticks or reeds are used.
II. Planting material required
The protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Authority (PPV & FRA) shall
decide when, where and in what quantity and quality the planting material is
required for testing a variety denomination applied for registration under the
protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Act, 2001. Applicants submitting
such planting material from a country other than India shall make sure that all
customs and quarantine requirements stipulated under relevant national legislations
and regulations are complied with. The minimum number of planting materials
(rooted cuttings) to be supplied by the applicant shall be 15 in open system 30 for
closed system of cultivation.
1. The planting material supplied shall be healthy, not lacking in vigor or affected by
any pest or diseases as well as nutrient deficiency. The age of the rooted cutting
from the terminal shoots shall be 3 months from the date of planting in the
polythene bags [20cm x 10cm size with soil mixture (1:1:1 soil, FYM and sand)].
The rooted cutting shall be of minimum height of 25 cm.
2. The plant material should not have undergone any treatment which would
affect the expression of the characteristics of the variety. The planting material
shall not have undergone any chemical or bio- physical treatment unless the
Competent Authority allow or request such treatments. If it has been treated, full
details of the treatment must be given.
III. Conduct of tests
1. The minimum duration of DUS tests shall be two crop years from one year after
planting from same plants or till the observations recorded on leaves from
plagiotropic branches. For the purpose of these test guidelines, crop years include
continuous leaf harvestable years (Leaves from plagiotropic shoot in open system
of cultivation and leaves from orthotropic shoot in closed system).
2. The test shall be conducted at one place suitable to its growing systems. If any
essential characteristics of the candidate variety are not expressed for visual
observation at this location, the variety shall be tested for further examinations at
another test site or under special test protocol on expressed request of the
applicant.
3. The field test shall be carried out under favoring normal growth and expression
of all test characteristics. In particular, a satisfactory crop must be produced in
two crop years. As a minimum, each test shall include fifteen (in open system)
thirty vines (in closed system) which shall be divided between two or more
replicates.
4. Test plot design
Open system of cultivation
Standard : Under Areca nut
Duration : 2 years
Spacing : 2.7/2.7m
Number of replications : 3
Plants/ replication : 5
Standard : Under Sesbania
Duration : 2 years
Spacing : 100 cm x 20 cm
Number of replications : 3
Plants/ replication : 5
Closed system of cultivation
Standard : Bamboo sticks
Duration : 2 years
Spacing : 70 cm x 10 cm
Number of replications : 3
Plants/ replication : 10
5. Additional test protocols for special tests established by the PPV & FR
Authority. 
IV. Methods and observation
1. The characteristics described in the Table of characteristics (section VII) shall be
used for testing of varieties and hybrids for their DUS.
2. Unless otherwise indicated, all observations determined by measurement or
counting shall be made on five vines or parts of five vines.
3. All the leaf characters shall be recorded on harvestable mature leaves of
orthotropic shoot which are present on 8
th to 10th node from the tip under closed
system of cultivation. All the leaf characters shall be recorded on the 2nd /3rd
(harvestable) leaf from plagiotropic shoot in open system of cultivation.
4. All observations shall be taken only from the one year old established vines.
V. Grouping of varieties
1. The candidate varieties for DUS testing shall be divided into groups to facilitate
the assessment of Distinctiveness. Characteristics, which are known from
experience not to vary or to vary only slightly, within a variety and which in their
various states are evenly distributed across all varieties in the collection, are
suitable for grouping purposes.
2. The following characteristics shall be used for grouping of Betelvine varieties.
i. Plant: Orthotropic stem colour (Characteristic 2)
ii. Leaf: Orthotropic leaf l/b ratio (Characteristic 7)
iii. .Leaf: Orthotropic leaf petiole length (Characteristic 8
iv. Leaf: Proximity of basal lobes of orthotropic leaf (Characteristic 16)
v. Leaf: Leaf lamina colour (orthotropic or plagiotropic) (characteristic 4 &19)
vi. Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf l/b ratio (characteristic 23)
vii. Plant: Sex of the plant (characteristic 24)
viii. Female inflorescence: Color (characteristic 26)
ix. Male inflorescence: Length (characteristic 28)
VI. Characteristics and symbols
1. To assess Distinctiveness, uniformity and stability, the characteristics and
their states are given in the table of characteristics (Section VII) shall be used.
The characters shall be recorded in open and closed system of cultivation as
specified in the section VIII.
2. Notes (1 to 9) shall be used to describe the state of each character for the
purpose of digital data processing and these notes shall be given against the
state of each characteristic.
3. Legend
(*) Characteristics that shall be observed during every growing season on all
varieties and shall always be included in the description of the variety, except
when the state of expression of any of these characters is rendered
impossible by a preceding phenomenal characteristic or by the
environmental conditions of the testing region. Under such exceptional
situation, adequate explanation shall be provided.
 ( *):Closed condition(Boroj)
 (**): Open condition
 (*, **): open/closed condition
(+) See explanation on the table of characteristics in section VIII. It is to be
noted that for certain characteristics the plant parts on which observations to
be taken are given in the explanation or figure(s) for clarity and not for the
colour variation.
4. A code number in the sixth column of Table of characteristics indicates the
optimum stage for the observation of each characteristic during the growth
and development of plant. The relevant growth stages corresponding to
these code numbers are described below:
a) Observations should be made on fully established one year old vines.
b) Observations should be made on harvestable mature leaves on orthotropic
shoots
c) Observations should be made on harvestable mature leaves on
plagiotropic shoots
d) Observations should be made on six months after the vine produces
plagiotrpic shoots.
e) Observations should be made during flowering period
5.Type of assessment of characteristics indicated in column seven of Table of
characteristics is as follows.
MG: Measurement by a single observation of a group of plants or parts of plants
MS: Measurement of a number of individual plants or parts of plants
VG: Visual assessment by a single observation of a group of plants or parts of plants
VS: Visual assessment by observation of individual plant or parts of plants
VIII. Explanation for the Table of characteristics
Characteristic 1.Plant: Adventitious root production
Adventitious roots shall be counted at 4th, 5th& 6th nodes from the tip of the
orthotropic shoot (mean of 3nodes) from five vines.
Characteristics 2.Plant: Orthotropic stem colour
The Orthotropic stem colour shall be noted at 3rd and 4th nodes from tip of the vine.
The visual assessment of the appearance shall be noted.
Characteristic 3. Plant: Orthotropic Stem internodal length (cm)
Orthotropic stem internodal length shall be measured from 5th to 8th internodes from
the tip of the orthotropic stem as mean of 3 nodes from five vines.
Characteristic 4.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf lamina Colour
Orthotropic leaf colour shall be observed on harvestable leaves from orthotropic
shoot
Characteristic 5. Leaf: Orthotropic leaf lamina length (l) (cm)
Leaf length will be measured as distance between point of attachment of lamina
with petiole and the tip of the leaf from 25 mature leaves of five randomly selected
vines.
Characteristic 6.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf breadth (b) (cm)
Leaf width will be measured as maximum distance between two lateral margins with
the help of a scale from 25 mature leaves of five randomly selected vines.
Characteristic 7.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf l/b ratio: Orthotropic leaf l/b ratio will be
calculated as length of leaf divided by width of leaf from 25 observations from five
vines.
Characteristic 8.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf petiole length (cm)
Leaf petiole length will be measured as distance between points of attachment of
the petiole with stem and lamina from 25 mature leaves of five randomly selected
vines.
Characteristic 9.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf thickness (µm): Orthotropic leaf thickness will
be measured from 25 mature leaves of five randomly selected vines with the help of
stereo microscope.
Characteristic 10&11.Leaf: Depth of sinus & width of orthotropic leaf lobe (cm)

Depth of sinus will be calculated as length of leaf including lobe subtracted by leaf
length (Leaf length from midrib) and measured from 25 mature leaves of five
randomly selected vines.
Leaf lobe width will be measured from one side, left or right.
Characteristic 12. Leaf: Depth of sinus/ width of lobe of orthotropic leaf
Ratio of depth of sinus to width of leaf lobe will be calculated. According to ratios,
three categories will be made as follows:
Entire or slightly lobed (< 0.15) 
Moderately lobed (0.15- 0.25)
Deeply lobed ( >0.25)
Characteristic 13. Leaf: Leaf lamina orientation along the midrib
 Flat lamina: both sides of the lamina are at same plane.
 V-shaped lamina: two sides of lamina form an inner angle at the midrib.
Characteristic 14.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf apex shape
Orthotropic leaf apex shape is assessed from the harvestable leaves from
orthotropic stem as given below
Acuminate- The margins between the apex and 0.75L is concave, curving toward
the center of the leaf, or is convex basally and concave apically
Acute-the margin between the apex and 0.75L curves away from the center of the
leaf
(L=Leaf length)
Characteristic 15.Leaf: Orthotropic leaf texture
Orthotropic leaf texture is observed on the harvestable leaves from orthotropic
Shoot.
Coriaceous-Leaf texture is thick and leathery
Membranaceous-Leaf texture is thin
Characteristic 16. Leaf: Proximity of basal lobes of orthotropic leaf
On the basis of relative distance between basal lobes of leaf, three categories will be
made as follows:
Lobes overlapped: when lobes are physically overlapping each other near the point
of attachment of lamina and petiole.
Close to overlap: when lobes are physically very close but not overlapping.
Separate: when lobes are sufficiently apart from each other
The visual assessment of the appearance shall be noted.
Characteristic 17. Number of plagiotropic shoots (No/m)
Number of plagiotropic shoots in one meter length shall be counted on the
orthotropic stem leaving 30 cm from the base in five vines.
Characteristic 18.Plant: Plagiotropic stem colour
Plagiotropic stem colour shall be assessed on terminal portion between 3rd& 4th
node.
Characteristic 19.Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf lamina colour
Plagiotropic leaf colour shall be assessed on harvestable leaves of plagiotropic shoot
Characteristic 20.Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf lamina shape
Plagiotropic leaf lamina shape shall be observed from the harvestable leaves of
plagiotropic shoots as described below
Elliptic- The widest part of the leaf is on an axis in the middle fifth of the long axis of
the leaf
Ovate oblong- The widest part of the leaf is on an axis in the middle fifth of the long
axis of the leaf but ovate in shape
Ovate-The widest part of the leaf is on axis in the basal 2/5 of the leaf.
Characteristic 21. Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf apex shape
Plagiotropic leaf apex Shape shall be assessed on the harvestable leaves of
plagiotropic shoot
Acuminate- The margins between the apex and 0.75L is concave, curving toward the
center of the leaf, or is convex basally and concave apically
Acute-the margin between the apex and 0.75L curves away from the center of the
leaf (L= Leaf Length)
Characteristic 22. Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf texture.
Plagiotropic leaf texture shall be observed from the harvestable leaves of
plagiotropic shoot
Coriaceous-Leaf texture is thick and leathery
Membranaceous-Leaf texture is thin
Characteristic 23.Leaf: Plagiotropic leaf l/b ratio
Plagiotropic leaf length(l):Leaf length will be measured as distance between point of
attachment of lamina with petiole and the tip of the leaf from 25 harvestable
plagiotropic leaves of five randomly selected vines.
Plagiotropic leaf breadth (b): Maximum leaf width will be measured as maximum
distance between two lateral margins from 25 harvestable plagiotropic leaves of five
randomly selected vines.
Plagiotropic leaf l/b ratio is calculated by dividing length /breadth of the leaf
(average of 25 leaves from five vines)
Characteristic 24.Plant: Sex of the plant
Sex of the vine shall be assessed from inflorescences borne on plagiotropic shoots
Female- vine with pistillate flowers only.
Male - vine with staminate flowers only.
Hermaphrodite-vine with hermaphrodite flowers only
Characteristic 25: Flowering Habit
Flowering Habit shall be assessed on duration of flowering and number of
inflorescences per Plagiotropic shoot
Shy flowering: Flowering is observed for 1-2 months or less
Moderate flowering: Flowering observed for 4-5 months
Profuse flowering: Flowering is observed throughout the year
Characteristic 26.Female inflorescence : colour
Inflorescence colour shall be observed on inflorescences found on plagiotropic
shoots of female varieties
Characteristic 27.Female inflorescence: length (cm)
Inflorescence length shall be measured on inflorescences on plagiotropic shoots at
full bloom stage in female varieties (average of 10 female inflorescences)
Characteristic 28. Male inflorescence: length (cm)
Inflorescence length shall be measured on Inflorescences on plagiotropic shoots at
full bloom stage in male varieties (average of observations on 10 male
inflorescences)
Characteristic 29: Number of inflorescence /plagiotropic branch
Number of inflorescence /plagiotropic branch shall be counted on plagiotropic
shoots (average of 15 plagiotropic shoots from five vines)
Characteristic 30: Leaf: Taste
Orthotropic and Plagiotropic leaf taste shall be assessed on harvestable leaves of
Orthotropic & plagiotropic shoot
Characterstic 31: Eugenol content:
Fresh harvestable leaves essential oil is extracted through hydro distillation and
Eugenol content analyzed with GC-MS/MS.