Phytotoxic effects of Piper betle L. extracts on germination of
Eclipta prostrata L. and Chloris barbata Sw. weeds 

ABSTRACT
Weeds are the major problem in agricultural crop fields. To control weeds
nowadays, tremendous hazardous herbicides have been applied into fields, causing harm to
farmers, consumers and environment. Alternatively, nature products have been evaluating for
allelopathic property and using as clean weed management. In this work, the effect of betel
extracts on weed germination was investigated and their potential allelochemicals were
identified. Betel oil, hexane, dichloromethane (DCM), ethanol (EtOH) and ethyl acetate
(EtOAc) crude extracts were derived from Piper betle leaf. The chemical constituents of the
extracts were determined using Gas chromatography/Mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Then, the
extracts were applied to 2 species of weeds, a broadleaf (Eclipta prostrata L.) and a
narrowleaf (Chloris barbata Sw.), and 3 crop species (Oryza sativa L., Lactuca sativa L. and
Brassica alboglabra L.H. Bailey) on filter paper. The results demonstrated that yields of oil,
hexane, DCM, EtOAc and EtOH extracts were 0.25%, 1.86%, 8.14%, 11.21% and 9.57%
respectively. All extracts contained mainly phenylpropanoids approximately 65% and
sesquiterpenoids approximately 13% including β-caryophyllene. All betel extracts had
allelopathic effect with different activities. Betel oil at 1 mg/mL was suitable for weed
control, since it had a slight effect on crops, but completely inhibited germination of weeds.
Hexane extract at 0.5 mg/mL significantly inhibited weeds germination with a little effect on
crops germination. EtOH extract and EtOAc extract at 1 mg/mL unaffected crop
germination, but totally inhibited weed germination. Taken together, EtOH and EtOAc were
the choice of solvents for betel extraction for weed control. These extracts had high recovery
yields and had selective action only to weeds without crops interference. Interestingly, the
extracts affected more to the narrowleaf weed, the main problem in paddy, than to the
broadleaf. The finding suggested P. betle as a potential source of natural herbicide.
Keywords:Piper betle L., Allelopathy, weed control, betel extracts, natural herbicide
INTRODUCTION
Weeds are defined as useless plants in agricultural fields. They are the main
problem for agriculture everywhere worldwide. They reduce the productivity of
economic crops. In order to get rid of weeds, farmers must depend on synthetic
chemical herbicides which are hazardous compounds. In 2014 farmers spent plenty 
12 NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 – 24
of money about 11,294 million bath for herbicides imported from United State of
America (Office of Agricultural Economics, 2014). Moreover, those toxic
compounds make a lot of problems to users, consumers and environment. They
deposit in land and run to river. To avoid toxicity of chemical herbicides, natural
ones were considered as an alternative clean way. Moreover, natural products also
alleviate weed tolerance due to commercial herbicide. The natural products with
allelopathic property have the ability to control other plant germination and growth.
This ability is from allelochemicals in the plant. Many works have been studied on
plant extracts and allelochemicals. The Juniperus oxycedrus L. sub sp. Macrocarpa
oil completely inhibited seed germination and seedling growth of 3 common weeds:
Phalaris paradoxa, Trifolium campestre and Lolium rigidum (Amri, Hamrouni et al
2011). Water extract of sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) could affect noxious weed
spp. such as H. spontaneum, L. rigidumand A. retroflexus (Nikneshan, Karimmojeni
et al 2011). Pine oil (Thuja orientalis L.) that contained terpenoids inhibited seed
germination and seedling growth of weeds Sinapis arvensis L., Phalaris paradoxa
L. and Lolium rigidum Gaud. (Ismail, Mohsen et al 2014). The crude ethyl acetate
extract of Suregada multiflorum Baill inhibited seed germination and seedling
growth of weeds Amaranthus tricolor (Armradit P, Chotsang P et al. 2008).
Interestingly, plants in Piperaceae family also had allelopathic activity. The
methanolic extract of Piper samentosum Roxb. 0.01 g/mL inhibited seedling growth
of Medicago sativa L. (Pukclai and Kato-Noguch 2011). The powder of Kava (Piper
methylsticum L.) inhibited seed germination of Lectuca sativa L. and paddy weeds
(Echinochloa crus-galli) and Monochoria vaginalis Presl. (Hong, Xuan et al. 2002).
The allelochemicals in extracts was identified and reported (Amri, Hamrouni et al.
2013). β-Caryophyllene at  3.0 mg/L significantly inhibited the germination rates
and seedling growth of Brassica camperstris and Raphanus sativus (Wang, Peng et
al. 2009).
Piper betle L. is a perennial dioecious, climber. It belongs to the family
Piperaceae, commonly known as “Plu”. It is extensively grown in South East Asian
countries including Thailand. Their leaves and fruits possess a strong pungent and
aromatic flavor. It was widely used as medicinal ingredients in traditional Thai
pharmacopoeia. The main active compounds in P.betle were phenylpropanoids and
particularly sesquiterpenes (Choopayak C, Laksuk H et al. 2011).
The objective of this study was to determine the phytotoxic effect of oil,
hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts of P.betle on seed
germination of Chloris barbata Sw. and Eclipta prostrata L. weeds, and Oryza
sativa L., Lactuca sativa L. and Brassica alboglabra L.H. Bailey crops. Moreover,
the chemical constituents in the betel extracts were determined. The gained
knowledge would promote the better understanding of allelopathic mechanisms in
plants.
NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 –24 13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
PLANT MATERIALS
The leaves of P. betle were collected from Phitsanulok during February
2015.
Weeds collection and Identification
The seeds of narrowleaf weed Chloris barbata Sw. “swallen fingergrass”
and broadleaf weed Eclipta prostrata L. “false daisy” were collected from paddy in
Sukhothai and Phitsanulok. The seeds were identified by plant taxonomist and
voucher specimens were deposited at plant specimen collection room at Faculty of
Science, Naresuan University. Before using, the seeds were incubated at 60 oC for
3 days for breaking seed dormancy.Rice seeds (Oryza sativa L.) were provided from
Phitsanulok rice seed center, Thailand. The seeds of Lactuca sativa L. “Lettuce” and
Brassica alboglabra L.H. Bailey “Chinese Kale” were purchased from Chiatai,
Thailand.
EXTRACTION OF BETEL LEAF
Essential oil extraction
The betel fresh leaves were weighted to 1500 gram and then were blended
by electronic blender to tiny pieces. The leaf was subjected to hydrodistillation for
4 hr using a Clevenger type apparatus. The upper layer was partitioned with hexane.
The solvent then was evaporated using rotary evaporator, anhydrous sodium sulfate
and gas nitrogen. The oil was collected, weighted and stored at 4 oC in dark.
Percentage of recovery yield (% yield) was calculated and reported as extracts
weight to fresh-leaf weight.
Solvent extraction
The betel leaves were washed with tap water, dried at 40 oC for 3 days and
grounded to rough powder. One hundred gram dried powder was incubated with 1 L
of different solvents, including hexane, dichloromethane (DCM), ethyl acetate
(EtOAc) and ethanol (EtOH) at 4 oC for 48 hr with interval shaking. Afterwards, the
suspension was filtered through Whatman paper No.1. The filtrate was collected and
evaporated with a rotary evaporator at 40 oC. The crudes were collected, weighted
and stored at 4 oC in dark. Percentage of recovery yield (% yield) was calculated and
reported as extracts weight to dried-leaf weight.
COMPOUND COMPONENTS IDENTIFICATION IN EXTRACTS
The betel oil and solvent extracts of were further analyzed for chemical
components identification using Gas-chromatography/Mass spectrometry (GC/MS).
The extracts were dissolved in ethanol at a ratio of 1:100 (v/v), filtered through
0.2 M and then subjected to GC/MS (Perkin-Elmer Sigma-115). The analysis was
carried out using HP-5MS, 19091S-433 column (30 m x 0.25 mm i.d.; film
thickness 0.25 µm). The operating conditions were as follows: injector and detector
temperatures, 150 and 280 C, respectively; carrier gas, helium; oven temperature
program, 5 min isothermal at 40 C, then at 2 C/min up to 250 C and finally held
isothermally for 20 min. The identity of components was established from their GC
retention times, by comparison of their mass spectra with those reported in literature
(Eight Peak Index of Mass Spectra) and by computer matching with the Wiley 5 
14 NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 – 24
mass spectra library, as well as, by co-injection with authentic available standards.
The amount of compounds reported as percentage of area which represented the
percentage of peak area of the compound to total compounds in each extract.
ALLELOPATHIC ACTIVITY ASSAY
Solvent toxicity on seed germination
The solvent toxicity was tested on seed germination. Three solvents at
various concentrations including dimethyl sulfoxide, (DMSO 0.2%), Tween 20
(0.5% and 1.0%) and Tween 80 (0.1%, 0.5% and 1.0%) were tested in paper plates.
Four mL of each solvent was added to Whatman No.1 paper in 9 cm petri dish.
Distilled water was used as negative control. Afterwards, 30 seeds were placed on
the paper and kept at 25 ±2°C, 12 hr photoperiod under cool-white fluorescent light
(20 μmol m–2
s
–1
). The number of germinated seeds was counted every day to 7 days.
Seeds with minimal root length of 1 mm were considered as germinated seeds. The
solvents which inhibited seed germination more than 70% comparing with seed
germination in water were considered as toxic solvent. The non-toxic solvents were
selected and used for betel extracts preparation. Experiments were conducted for
three replications.
Betel extracts solubility
The crude extracts 1 mg/mL were tested for solubility in different solvents
including 0.2% DMSO, 0.1% Tween 20, 0.5% Tween 20, 1.0% Tween 20, 0.1%
Tween 80, 0.5% Tween 80 and 1.0% Tween 80. The solvents that could completely
dissolve extracts were selected for betel extract dissolution.
Bioassay
Four mL of extracts at different concentrations (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL)
was added to Whatman paper No.1 in glass petri dish (9 cm diameter). Distilled
water was used as control of seed germination and solvents were used as negative
controls of bioassay. Consequently, 30 seeds were placed on paper and incubated at
25 ±2 °C and 12 hr photoperiod under cool-white fluorescent light (20 μmol m–2
s
–1
).
After 7 days of incubation, the number of seed germination was recorded.
Experiments were conducted for 3 replications.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All experiments were done for three replications. Data were subjected to
analysis using Duncan’s New Multiple Range Test (DMRT) by SPSS Statistics
version 17.0. The significant difference was at the 0.05 probability level.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Extracts yield and chemical constituents in extracts
The essential oil from the fresh leaf of P. betle leaf was transparent, lightyellowish liquid with pungent smell. For the solvent extracts, all were extracted
from dried leaf. The extracts obtained were opaque semisolid with green or brown
color. Dicholoromethane extract was dark brown; ethyl acetate extract was dark
green, whereas hexane and ethanol extracts were light green. The yields of oil
hexane, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts were 0.25%, 1.86%,
8.14%, 11.21% and 9.57% (w/w) respectively (Table 1). 
NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 –24 15
Table 1.Yield and physical appearance of betel extracts
Extracts Physical appearances % yield (w/w)
Betel oil transparent, light-yellowish, liquid 0.25
Hexane opaque, light green, semisolid 1.86
Dichloromethane opaque, dark brown, semisolid 8.14
Ethyl acetate opaque, dark green, semisolid 11.21
Ethanol opaque, light green, semisolid 9.52
Compounds components in extracts were identified by GC-MS. Main
compounds were phenylpropanoids and terpenoids. The top-ten most of compounds
in betel oil were shown in chromatogram and list in Figure1. The majority of
compounds were phenylpropenoids approximately 65.9% including isoeugenol
acetate (21.2%), eugenol (20.2%), 4-allylpyrocatechol diacetate (14.4%), transpropenyl guaiacol (4.8%), eugenol acetate (4.3%) and isoeugenol (1.0%). The
second most ones were sesquiterpenoids approximately 13.2% including βcaryophyllene (6.8%), α-humulene (2.4%), α-gurjunene (2.3%) and δ-cadinene
(1.7%) (Figure1).

16 NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 – 24
Figure 2. Main compounds found in betel oil were phenylpropanoids and
sesquiterpenoids.
The kind of compounds found in betel solvent extracts were similar to in
betel oil, but the amount of the compounds was quite different. All of extracts
contained plenty of phenylpropanoids and some sesquiterpenoids. Hexane, DCM
and EtOH extracts had profoundly high phenylpropanoids 80-90%, whereas EtOAc
extract had them about 50%. The main compounds found in solvent extracts were
eugenol acetate, isoeugenol acetate and 4-allylpyrocatechol diacetate.
Sesquiterpenes including α-copaene, β-caryophyllene, α-humulene, α-amorphene, δcadinene also were found in solvent extracts (Figure 3).
Comparing between solvent extracts, the different numbers of compounds in
each extract lead to the difference in percentage of the compound, even though the
same amount. The more number of compounds lead to lesser percent of each
compound in the extract. For example, among betel solvent extracts, hexane extract
had the highest amount of β-caryophyllene (Figure 4), but the percentage of the
compounds in hexane extract (2.27%) was less than in EtOAc extract
(3.27%)(Figure 3).

diacetoxybenzene
51.96 48.79 40.28 30.59
Figure 3. GC/MS Chromatogram of main compounds found in different solvent
extracts; hexane, dicholoromethane (DCM), ethyl acetate (EtOAc) and ethanol
(EtOH). Retention time was set between 10.5 to 15 min. Percentage of compounds
represented the percentage of peak area of the compound to total compounds in each
extract.
Many reports showed that phenylpropenes and sesquiterpenes were found in
betle oil with difference kinds and quantities depend on habitat of betel. Among
many reports, the study on chemical composition of betle oil in Thailand showed the
same pattern with our study (Sukatta, Haruthaithanasen et al. 2003). The major
components from betel oil is phenylpropenoids and sesquiterpenoids including
isoeugenol, eugenol acetate, 4-allyl-1,2-diacetoxybenzene, copaene, βcaryophyllene, β-gurjunene, isoledene, chavicol acetate, cineole, α- caryophyllene,
chavicol, linalool, elemene and eugenol. Another report, P. betle leaf oil from Sri
Lankan contained safrole (52.7%), allylpyrocatechol diacetate (15.4%), eugenol
(6.4%) and eugenol acetate (5.8%) as the major components followed by sabinene
(2.2%), myrcene (1.1%), β-caryophyllene (1.2%), α-selinene (1.4%), β-selinene
(1.2%) (Mohottalage, Tabacchi et al. 2007). While the essential oil of P. betle leaves
from India contained 5(2-propenyl)-1,3-benzodioxole (32.79%), eugenol (16.17%),
18 NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 – 24
2-methoxy-4-(2propenyl)-acetate-phenol (8.01%), gurjunene (4.14%), sabinene
(3.43%) and germacrene D (3.19%) (Sugumaran, Poornima et al. 2011). However,
Philippine betel oil had chavibetol (53.1%), chavibetol acetate (15.5%),
caryophyllene (3.79%) as the major composition (Rimando, Han et al. 1986).
Essential oil of P. nigrum in India contained β-caryophyllene (29.9%), limonene
(13.2%), β-pinene (7.9%) and sabinene (5.9%). Whereas, the major component of
both ethanol and ethyl acetate extracts contained piperine (63.9 and 39.0%), βcaryophyllene (1.0% and 6.7%), piperolein (5.3% and 5.5%) and piperanine (4.0%
and 5.1%) (Kapoor, Singh et al. 2009).
Figure 4. GC/MS Chromatogram of main compounds found in different solvent
extracts; hexane, dicholoromethane (DCM), ethyl acetate (EtOAc) and ethanol
(EtOH). Retention time was set between 10.5 to 12.5 min.
Allelopathic activity of betel extracts
Toxicity of solvents and solubility of extracts
To test the effect of betel extracts on seed germination, all five extracts were
diluted to different concentrations. The solvent for extract dissolution was selected
from 2 criteria. 1) It was not toxic on seed germination and 2) it could dissolve betel
extracts very well. To complete the criteria for solvent of choice, toxicity of solvents
and solubility of extracts were tested.
First of all, toxicity of candidate solvents were tested on seed germination
comparing to distilled water (Table 2). Percentage of germination more than 70%
was defined as non-toxic. The result showed that 0.2% DMSO and 0.5% Tween 80
was non-toxic solvents and could be used for germination assay. 0.2% DMSO had
no effect on seed germination at all (85-90% germination). 0.5% Tween 80 had no
effect on O. sativa, B. alboglabra and E. prostrata germination (90% germination),
NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 –24 19
but a little effect on L. sativa (71.11% germination) and C. barbata germination
(73.33% germination).
In addition to toxicity test, the solvent of choice have to completely dissolve
the extracts (Table 3). The results showed that 0.2% DMSO could dissolve only
betel oil, but not others. 0.1% Tween 20 could not dissolve any extract at all. 0.1%
Tween 80 could dissolve only ethanol extract, 0.5% Tween 20 and 0.5% Tween 80
could dissolve all extracts except DCM. 1.0% Tween 20 and 1.0% Tween 80 could
dissolve all extracts.
Using 2 criteria, 0.2% DMSO was used for betel oil preparation at 0.1, 0.5,
1.0, 2.0 mg/mL for bioassay, since it could totally dissolve oil and it was no toxic on
all seed tested. 0.1% Tween 20 and 0.1% Tween 80 was not suitable because they
could not dissolve extracts well. 1.0% Tween 20 and 1.0% Tween 80 was not
selected because they were toxic to seed tested. 0.5% Tween 20 was also toxic due
to completely inhibited E. prostrate seed germination. Then the solvent of choice for
crude extracts dissolution was 0.5% Tween 80, since it could dissolve all extracts
except DCM and there was a little effect on seed germination. For bioassay, extracts
of hexane, EtOAc and EtOH was diluted in 0.5% Tween 80 to 0.5, 1.0 and
2.0 mg/mL.
The allelopathic potentials of P. betle oil and solvent extracts on seed
germination was evaluated against 5 plant species; 3 crops and 2 weeds, including a
monocot (O. sativa), dicot crops (L. sativa and B. alboglabra), a narrowleaf weed
(C. barbata) and a broadleaf weed (E. prostrata). Betel extracts were tested at
different concentrations including 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL of betel oil, and 0.5,
1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL of hexane extract, ethyl acetate extract and ethanol extract, using
distilled water as seed germination control, 0.2% DMSO as betel oil solvent control
and 0.5% Tween 80 as solvent control. After treatment for 7 days, the germination
of seeds was counted. Percentage of seed germination under extracts treatment was
calculated as normalized value to seed germination in the solvent. The results
demonstrated that all betel extracts had allelopathic activity at different
concentrations (Table 4).
Inhibitory effect of betel extracts were tested on crops and weeds seeds
germination. The results revealed that 1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL of betel oil inhibited all
tested seeds (Figure 5a). Betel oil at concentration of 0.1 and 0.5 mg/mL did not
affect or slightly affected on crops seeds but oil at 0.5 mg/ml could completely
inhibited seed germination of both weeds. Hexane extract at 0.5 and 1.0 mg/mL
completely inhibited C. barbata, but not E. prostrata (70% inhibition) and no
inhibitory effect on crops. Hexane 2.0 mg/mL inhibited 2 weeds and a lettuce, but
had a little effect on rice (20% inhibition) and chinese kale and (30% inhibition)
(Figure 5b). Ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts acted similarly on phytotoxic effect
(Figure 5c-d). At 0.5 mg/mL, they completely inhibited C. barbata with some effect
on E. prostrata (60% inhibition) and no inhibitory effect on crops. At 1.0mg/mL,
they perfectly inhibited both weeds, and no effect on crops. At 2.0 mg/mL, both
extracts inhibited all weeds, but had some inhibitory effect on crops. Taken together
ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts at 1.0 mg/mL were choices of weed control, since
they unaffected crop seed germination, but totally inhibited weed germination.
Our study demonstrated that betel oil and solvent extracts had phytotoxic
activity, especially selectively more effect on narrowleaf weed than on broadleaf
weed and no effect on crops. There were several reports about allelopathic property
in plants. Methanol extract from hexane fraction of lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.)
showed the most inhibition on alfalfa root growth and followed by ethyl acetate,
butanol and water fractions (Chon, Jang et al. 2005). Moreover, plants in Piperaceae
(the same family with P.betle) also had allelopathic activity. P. methysticum L. had
allelopathic effect by inhibiting germination and growth of lettuce (Lactuca sativa
L), barnyardgrass (Echino chloacrus-galli Beauv var. formosensis Ohwi.), and ducktongue weed (Monochoria vaginalis Presl var. plantaginea Solms-Laub.) (Hong,
Xuan et al. 2002). The ethyl acetate and n-butanol extracts of P. nigrum showed
inhibitory activity on Zea mays, Glycine max, Cucurbita moschata, Echinochloa
crus-galli and Digitarias anguinalis (Yan, Zhu et al. 2006). Moreover, P.
sarmentosum Roxb. inhibited growth of narrowleaf (Echinochloa crus-galli Beauv,
Echinochloa colona Link., Festucamyuros L., Lolium multiflorum Lam., Lolium
rigidum Gaud., Digitaria sanguinalis L., Leptochloa chinensis L. Nees.) and
broadleaf (Eriogonum compositum Douglas ex Benth.) (Pukclai and Kato-Noguch
2011).
NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 –24 21
Table 4. Effects of betel extracts on seed germination
The main components in extracts, phenylpropanoids or sesquiterpenoids,
might act as allelopchemicals. Our results presented the moderate amount of βcaryophyllene in all extracts. It is well-known volatile with allelopathic activity. It
was reported as inhibitor of growth and development of seedlings of various plants.
β-Caryophyllene from hexane extraction of Senecio salignus inhibited Physalis
ixocarpa and Echinochloa crus-galli growth (Sanchez-Munoz, Aguilar et al. 2012).
Another report, β-caryophyllene had allelopathic effect by inhibiting the 
22 NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 – 24
development of crops seedlings such as Raphanus sativus, Lactuca sativa and
Brassica campestris (Wang, Staehelin et al. 2010).
NU. International Journal of Science 2015; 12(1) : 11 –24 23
Figure 5. Effects of essential oil and solvents extracts at different concentrations on
crops and weeds germination. a) betel oil b) Hexane c) EtOAc d) EtOH Distilled
water, 0.2% DMSO and 0.5% Tween 80 were used as control. The statistic values
were compared between different concentration of betel extracts within a plant
species at p-value 0.05.
CONCLUSION
Taken together, ethyl acetate and ethanol were the best choice of solvents
for betel extraction for weed control. These solvents obtained high recovery yields
from betel leaf. The extracts had selective action only to weeds without crops
interference. Interestingly, the extracts affected the narrowleaf weed which is the
main trouble in paddy more than to the broadleaf one.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was financially supported by Naresuan University Research
Fund. Thank Associated Professor Dr. Kornkanok Inkaninun for technical support
and Dr. Pranee Nangngam for plant identification and collection in plant specimen
collection room.