Murraya koenigii Journals & Books

Murraya koenigii (Linn.) Spreng (Family: Rutaceae), commonly known as “curry patta” in Hindi, is popular as a spice and condiment among the Asians.

Murraya koenigii Leaves and Their Use in Dementia
Murraya koenigii

Murraya koenigii (Linn.) Spreng (Family: Rutaceae), commonly known as “curry patta” in Hindi, is popular as a spice and condiment among the Asians. The leaves (either fresh or dried), which have a distinctive flavor and aroma, are usually added to gravy and other meals. It is known that the leaves are a major source of carbazole alkaloids, including mahanimbine, girinimbine, murrayacine, koenine, murrayanine, isomurrayazoline, koenidine, mahanine, koenimbine, koenigine, and 8,8′-biskoenigine. These carbazole alkaloids have been well studied for their biological activities. Other alkaloids, namely O-methylmahanine, O-methylmurrayamine, bismahanine, isomahanine, and bispyrayafoline have also been identified and isolated from M. koenigii leaves [4].

It is noteworthy that the alkaloids are interesting groups of naturally occurring chemical compounds, which possess antioxidant and anti-dementia properties. Besides that, the alkaloids are also used as astringents and traditional medications in treating stomachache, influenza, rheumatism, traumatic injury, and dysentery. The leaves have been reported to possess hypoglycemic and antidiabetic, hepatoprotective, anticancer, antibacterial, antioxidant, chemomodulatory, immunomodulatory, antidiarrheal, and antiinflammatory activities [5–13]. As far as dementia is concerned, M. koenigii has demonstrated antiamnesic activity [14]. It can also improve memory and act as an inhibitor of both cholinesterase and BACE1 [15]. In addition, M. koenigii also reduces oxidative stress by improving the indigenous radical-scavenging mechanisms [16]. This chapter aims to highlight the possible beneficial effects of M. koenigii in delaying the progression of dementia.
Plant-Derived Immunomodulators
17.3.10 Murraya koenigii (Distribution: Asia, South Africa; Family: Rutaceae; Common Names: Curry Leaves)

Murraya koenigii is commonly used in culinary due to its aromatic quality. It is rich in many vitamins and is used for treating stomachaches and as a carminative and analgesic. It has anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antitumor properties due to the presence of bioactive ingredients like carbazole alkaloid. Many bioactive compounds are present in M. koenigii like koenigin, koenine, koenimbine, girinimbin, iso-mahanimbin, koenidine, cyclomahanimbine, tetrahydromahanimbine, carbazole alkaloids, murrayazoline, mahanimbine, murrayastine, etc. Aqueous extracts of M. koenigii shows antioxidant activity and protects cardiac tissue against cadmium-induced oxidative stress (Mitra et al., 2012). Leaf extracts also reduced lipid peroxidation in ethanol-induced toxicity in hepatocytes (Sathaye et al., 2011).

Methanolic extracts reduced carrageenan-induced paw edema in albino rats, and this anti-inflammatory effect is comparable to the drug diclofenac (10 mg/kg, p.o.) (Gupta et al., 2010; Bhandari, 2012). Methanolic extracts of M. koenigii also significantly increased the NO production from macrophages, which is the principle effector molecule produced by macrophages, hence an indicator of its enhanced cytotoxic activity. It also increased the phagocytic index in carbon-clearance test. Moreover, the humoral antibody response to ovalbumin also increased on treatment with the methanolic extract, thus indicating an overall elevation in humoral response and immunostimulatory effect of the extract on B-cells. There was no significant difference in DTH response on treatment with the extract indicating that it does not have a stimulatory effect on T-cells and hence on cell-mediated immunity (Shah et al., 2008). M. koenigii is a potent antimicrobial agent against various antibiotic resistant bacteria such as P. aeruginosa, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, K. pneumoniae, and E. coli (Nagappan et al., 2011).
Endophytic fungal diversity of selected medicinal plants and their bio-potential applications

Yash Mishra, ... Madan Mohan Sharma, in Fungi Bio-Prospects in Sustainable Agriculture, Environment and Nano-technology, 2021
Systematic position

Division: Angiosperms; Class: Dicotyledonae; Subclass: Polypetalae; Series: Disciflorae

Order: Geraniales; Family: Rutaceae; Genus: Murraya; Species: koenigii

Murraya koenigii is small spreading plant and attains height of about 2.5 m. The leaves of this shrub are exstipulate, bipinnately compound, reticulate venation, lanceolate 25–30 cm long, each bearing many leaflets. The main stem is dark green to brown with numerous dots on it and revealed the colorless wood beneath and its girth is 12–16 cm. Flowers of this plant is bisexual, funnel-shaped, scented odor, ebracteate, actinomorphic, pentamerous, hypogynous, calyx-5, lobed, corolla white, polypetalous, inferior with 5 petals, lanceolate and its fruits are round to oblong, fully ripe fruits black with a very shining surface. Flowering starts from the middle of April and ends in the middle of May followed by fruiting in July to August (Kirtikar and Basu, 1935; Parmar and Kaushal, 1982). Various parts of this plant have been widely used by tribal communities. The leaves of this plant have been used as tonic and cure stomachic, carminative, dysentery, vomiting, piles (Handral et al., 2012; Singh et al., 2014). This is also documented useful as analgesic, allays heat of the body, thirst, inflammation and itching. Knolker and Reddy (2008) reported that curry leaf has richest contributor of carbazole alkaloids which contain diverse pharmacological activities. However, other secondary metabolites viz., alkaloids i.e. mahanine, koenine, koenigine, koenidine, girinimbiol, girinimibine, koenimbine, O-methyl murrayamine A, O-methyl mahanine, isomahanine, bismahanine, bispyrayafoline and other phytoconstituents such as coumarin glycoside viz., scopotin, murrayanine, calcium, phosphorus, iron, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin C, carotene and oxalic acid etc. have been reported (Savitha and Balamurugan, 2014) (Table 10.1). Moreover, endophytic fungi viz. Curvularia lunata, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus flavus, Candida albicans, Phoma hedericola and Penicillium sublateritium, etc. have been reported from this plant species earlier (Thalavaipandian et al., 2011; Nath et al., 2014; Kumar et al., 2015).
Antiemetic African Medicinal Spices and Vegetables

S. Tchatchouang, ... V. Kuete, in Medicinal Spices and Vegetables from Africa, 2017
5.5 Murraya koenigii

The Curry tree M. koenigii (L.) Spreng., a tropical to subtropical tree of the family Rutaceae, is a spice used in many countries in Africa including Nigeria (Kazeem et al., 2015) and Niger (Ndukwu and Ben-Nwadibia, 2016). Apart from many other properties, its leaves are used to relieve nausea and vomiting (Chowdhury et al., 2008). The major constituents responsible for the aroma and flavor have been reported as pinene, sabinene, caryophyllene, cadinol, and cadinene. In fact, the essential oils from the leaves of M. koenigii contained 39 compounds of which the most abundant is 3-carene followed by caryophyllene (Chowdhury et al., 2008). This plant is known to be the richest source of carbazole alkaloids (Rajendran et al., 2014).
Natural Antioxidants in Dementia

Ricardo Cabezas MSc, ... George E. Barreto MSc, PhD, in Diet and Nutrition in Dementia and Cognitive Decline, 2015
Murraya koenigii

The curry-leaf tree, M. koenigii, has been used for a long time in the Ayurvedic system of medicine [14], due to its multiple pharmacological properties as an antioxidant, stimulant, and anti-nociceptive and in the management of diabetes mellitus [14,47]. The leaves of M. koenigii contain various glycosides and alkaloids like cyclomahanimbine, tetrahydromahanimbine, and carbazole alkaloids [14]. Experiments conducted in 2010 found that ethanolic extract of M. koenigii ameliorates the cognitive deficit in the memory of aged mice via reduction of cholesterol levels and brain cholinesterase activity, possibly through the action of carbazole alkaloids [47]. Since AD has been related to an abnormal accumulation of cholesterol levels that increase Aβ plaques, the use of M. koenigii as a cholesterol-reductive agent is gaining importance against neurodegenerative disorders [47].

Amino Acids, Peptides, Porphyrins, and Alkaloids

Neelam Misra, ... Sushil Kumar, in Comprehensive Natural Products Chemistry, 1999
4.03.5.5 Carbazole Alkaloids

The carbazole alkaloids include several important drugs. In addition, a large number of carbazole alkaloids are found in indole alkaloids. Carbazole alkaloids have been found in the leaf plant Murraya koenigii (Rutaceae) and the roots of Gylcosmis pentaphylla and Clausena heptaphylla. Five new carbazole alkaloids, clausine B, E, H, I, and K, were isolated from the stem bark of Clausena excavata.286 The isolation and pharmacological evaluation of some carbazole and carbazolequinone alkaloids obtained from this species have been published.287–289 C. excavata is used as a folk medicine for the treatment of snakebite and abdominal pain and as a detoxicant. Five carbazole alkaloids, murrayamine-M, -J, -N, -I, and -K, were isolated from the leaves of Murraya euchrestifolia.290 Two other carbazole alkaloids, murrayamine-D and -E, were also isolated from the leaves of M. euchrestifolia291 and from a stem bark extract of M. koenigii. Two carbazole alkaloids, 2-methoxycarbazole-3-methylcarboxylate and 1-hydroxy-3-methylcarbazole, were identified using spectroscopic and chemical evidence.

Synergy Among Dietary Spices in Exerting Antidiabetic Influences

Seetur R. Pradeep, Krishnapura Srinivasan, in Bioactive Food as Dietary Interventions for Diabetes (Second Edition), 2019
3 Spices as Useful Antidiabetic Adjuncts

Spices are consumed as food adjuncts to impart flavor, aroma, piquancy, and color to our foods.8 Several health beneficial physiological effects of commonly consumed spices have been experimentally or clinically documented in recent decades. A few commonly consumed spices are now understood to possess significant hypoglycemic in both animals and humans. Spices such as fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) seeds, onion (Allium cepa), garlic (Allium sativum), and black cumin (Nigella sativa) are recognized to possess hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic, and antioxidant influence in diabetic situation. Limited animal studies have also documented beneficial antidiabetic influences of curcumin of turmeric (Curcuma longa), cumin seeds (Cuminum cyminum), and curry leaves (Murraya koenigii) (Fig. 3). The high content of mucilage galactomannan in fenugreek is responsible for a lower dietary glucose uptake and hence believed to facilitate glycemic control in diabetics. The two Allium spices—onion and garlic largely owe their antidiabetic property to sulfur compounds allyl propyl disulfide and diallylsulfide, which have insulinotropic activity. In addition, these sulfur compounds have insulin sparing action by protecting from sulfhydryl inactivation.8 The hypoglycemic effect of black cumin might be due to its volatile oil and thymoquinone (TQ). Mechanism of hypoglycemic effect of black cumin is multifactorial including, elevation of insulin, attenuation of insulin resistance, hepatic gluconeogenesis, and oxidative stress in diabetic animals.9 Curry leaves shows protective effects in experimental diabetes, possibly by decreasing oxidative stress and preserving pancreatic β-cell integrity. Curcumin, the yellow principle of turmeric—has been found to be effective in improving the glycemic status and glucose tolerance in diabetic animals/type-2 diabetic patients (Fig. 4). Dietary fenugreek, garlic, onion, curcumin, and red pepper are found to be effective as hypocholesterolemic under conditions of diabetes-induced hyperlipidemia.