Murraya koenigii

Synonyms
Bergera koenigii L.
Chalcas koenigii (L.) Kurz
Common Name: Curry Leaf

General Information
Murraya koenigii is a most attractive, small evergreen tree with wonderfully sweet, curry-pungent foliage. It can grow 4 - 5 metres tall.
The plant is harvested from the wild for local use as a food, medicine and source of materials. It is often cultivated for its leaves and medicinal uses in the gardens of the tropics, where it can be used as a hedge, and is often sold in local markets.
Known Hazards
None known
Botanical References

Range
E. Asia - China, Indian subcontinent, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam.
Habitat
Dry lowland woodland. Moist forests at elevations of 500 - 1,600 metres in southern China.
Cultivation Details
A plant of the moist tropics, where it is found at elevations up to 1,600 metres. It grows best in areas where annual daytime temperatures are within the range 27 - 41°c, but can tolerate 8 - 47°c. It prefers a mean annual rainfall in the range 1,400 - 1,800mm, but tolerates 500 - 2,500mm.
Grows best in full sun. A very easily grown plant, succeeding in most soils and situations. Prefers a fertile, humus-rich, moisture-retentive but well-drained, light soil. Prefers a pH in the range 5.5 - 6.5, tolerating 5 - 7. Established plants are drought tolerant.
Plants can sucker freely and also spreads by seeds, so it can become invasive. Due to the vigorous suckering, plants are not really very suitable for small gardens.
Edible Uses
Leaves - cooked. The pungent, aromatic leaves are a common ingredient in curries, chutneys, stews etc. An indispensible ingredient in southern Indian curries. The leaves retain their characteristic flavour and aroma even after drying. Another report says that the leaves are little know away from areas in which the plant is grown because the leaves lose their flavour upon being dried.

Fruit - a peppery flavour. The black fruit is 8 - 10mm in diameter.
Medicinal
Curry leaf contains several medically active constituents including a glycoside called koenigin, an essential oil and tannins. It is a warming, strongly aromatic herb that improves appetite and digestion.

The leaves, roots and bark can all be used internally in the treatment of digestive problems. It has been shown that the leaves increase digestive secretions and relieve nausea, indigestion and vomiting. The leaves can be used internally in treating constipation, colic and diarrhoea. The leaves are used in the treatment of diarrhoea and dysentery.
The leaves can be applied externally as a poultice to treat burns and wounds.
The leaves are harvested as required and used fresh.
The roots and bark are harvested as required and can be used fresh or dried.

The juice of the fruit, mixed with lime juice (Citrus aurantiifolia) is applied to soothe insect bites and stings.
A paste made from the bark is applied to the bites of poisonous insects and other animals.
Agroforestry Uses:
Plants can be grown as a hedge.
Other Uses
An oil is extracted from the ripe seeds.

An oil obtained from the leaves (essential oil?) is used in the soap industry.
An essential oil obtained from the leaves is used as an ingredient in commercial cosmetic preparations as a preservative.
An extract of the stems and twigs is used as an ingredient in commercial cosmetic preparations as a skin conditioner.

The leaves are thought to be a hair tonic in India, where it is believed that they can prevent the hair greying.

The flowers are used to repel shrews.
Propagation
Seed -
Division of suckers in the growing season. Very easy.
Cuttings of half-ripe wood.
