17 Amazing Health Benefit of Curry Leaves!

Nutritional Value of Curry Leaves

100 grams of curry leaves provide around 108 calories of energy. They are rich in carbohydrates, proteins, fibre, calcium, phosphorus, iron and other minerals. They also contain vitamins like vitamin A, vitamin B, vitamin C, vitamin E, etc.
Health Benefits of Curry Leaves
1. Powerful antioxidant

Curry leaves are rich in plant compounds which are powerful antioxidants. These compounds keep us healthy and protect us from numerous diseases.

They protect us from oxidative damage, preventing diseases of the nervous system, cardiovascular system, kidneys etc.
2. May reduce the risk of cancer

Curry leaves have anti-mutagenic potential. They protect our bodies from different types of cancers.

Flavonoids in Curry leaves act as anti-cancer agents. They are effective in inhibiting the growth of breast cancer cells.

Curry leaves also protect the body from colon cancers. Curry leaves are also beneficial in protecting our bodies from cervical cancer.
3. Reduces risk of heart diseases

Curry leaves protect our hearts by preventing oxidative damage. Consumption of Curry leaves also decreases cholesterol levels. It also reduces the level of triglycerides.

Reduction in risk factors thus helps in protecting us from heart diseases.
4. Helps in the management of diabetes

Consumption of Curry leaves helps in the management of diabetes and its related complications. Curry leaves were found to be highly effective in reducing blood glucose levels.

Curry leaves are rich in fibre which slows down digestion, thus preventing sudden spikes in blood sugar levels in our blood. They also boost the activity of insulin, further helping patients with diabetes.  You can take a look at the Diabetes Food Chart to find other foods that can be included in your Diabetic Diet Plan.  

Also Read: 10 Best Foods for Diabetes
5. Help deal with stomach ailments

Curry leaves are very effective in treating stomach ailments like diarrhoea and constipation. Curry leaves contain carbazole alkaloids that help control diarrhoea. The curry leaves can be consumed in the form of a paste or the juice of the leaves can be consumed. 

Curry leaves also have mild laxative properties that help heal constipation and indigestion problems. 
6. Effective against morning sickness

Morning sickness and nausea can be effectively controlled with the consumption of curry leaf tea. Curry leaf tea is especially beneficial for pregnant women to help with their morning sickness.
7. Analgesic

Curry leaves were found to be useful in relieving pain and used traditionally as an analgesic (pain reliever).
8. Neuroprotective effects

Consumption of Curry leaves was found to increase the antioxidants that protect our brain.

They were also found to be useful in Alzheimer’s disease by protecting the neurons from oxidative damage.

Curry leaves are also found to be beneficial in amnesia (memory loss), commonly found in the elderly due to ageing.

Read More: 5 Foods That Are Good For The Brain
9. Kills bacteria

Curry leaves are antibacterial. They are effective in preventing bacterial infections by-  E.coli and Staphylococcus.
10. Hepatoprotective effects

Curry leaves are powerful antioxidants and protect our liver from damage caused due to oxidative stress.

They also protect our liver from infections and reduce inflammation.

Curry leaves are found to be effective in the treatment of liver cirrhosis.
11. Excellent for our hair

Curry leaves when boiled with coconut oil makes an excellent hair tonic that prevents greying and stimulates hair growth.

They strengthen our hair and prevent hair loss. They are also helpful in preventing dandruff and dry scalp.
12. Treatment of Anaemia

Curry leaves are rich in iron and folic acid which is important in improving iron levels in the body.

This immensely helps patients suffering from Anaemia.
13. Good for our eyes

Curry leaves are rich in vitamin A and therefore beneficial for our eyes.

They help in maintaining good eyesight and prevent the development of cataracts.

Read More: How to Keep Your Eyes Healthy?
14. Good for our skin

Curry leaves are helpful in soothing mild burns, bruises and eruptions on the skin. They also protect our skin from infections.

Therefore Curry leaves are also a constituent of some soaps.
15. Good for oral health

Curry leaves create an environment in our mouth that prevents the development of bacteria. [21]

They thus help in maintaining oral health and preventing oral diseases.
16. Helps in weight loss

Alkaloids in Curry leaves help in maintaining cholesterol levels in our body.

Curry leaves also act as a detoxifying agent, removing toxins from our body and preventing the accumulation of fat. This helps in weight loss.
17. Heals wounds

Curry leaves can even be applied topically! Apply curry leaves paste on wounds, mild burns or rashes to help heal them. Curry leaves have antiseptic properties that can even protect the wounded area of the skin from infections.
The ideal dosage of curry leaves

- 8 to 10 fresh Curry leaves per day
- 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of Curry leaf powder per day
- 1 to 2 Curry leaves capsules per day

Curry leaves are also known as

- Meetha neem
- Kadi patta
- Kadhi limbdo
- Kadhi limbu
- Girinimba
- Krishnanimba
- Karuveppilai
- Karapincha
- Curry vepillai
- Kari bevu
- Karivepaku
