31 Mango (Mangifera Indica) Recipes That Taste Like Pure Gold

31 Mango Recipes That Taste Like Pure Gold
We love floral, sweet, sunshine-colored mangoes any way we can get them—starting with these recipes for salads, desserts, drinks, and more.

What’s your favorite type of mango? Did you say Ataulfo? Carabao? Are you a Tommy Atkins loyalist? With so many varieties to try, this list of our best mango recipes should come in handy. Go beyond mango salsa–topped fish tacos into a world of impressive mango desserts (including layer cakes, meringues, and puddings), savory-sweet mango sauces (there's plenty of chile-lime action in here), and tons of variations on mango relishes, salads, and more.

When buying mangoes, look for fruit that’s heavy for its size. The flesh should give when you gently squeeze it. Ripe yellow-skinned mangoes may show off a few wrinkles—don’t be deterred, these are supremely sweet and ready to be cut immediately (pop over here for our tutorial on how to cut a mango). Store firmer mangoes at room temperature until ripe and then stash in the fridge only as necessary for no more than 3 days.

1/31
Coconut Chia-Tapioca Pudding

Chia seed pudding meets tapioca pudding meets creamy coconut milk in this delicious mango recipe. It's a great way to end any meal—or even start the day when served for breakfast.

2/31
Coconut-Mango-Lime Barfi

One bowl, no-bake, and make-ahead-friendly? This South Asian dessert is all that—and chewy, tangy, and fruity too.

3/31
Mango and Avocado Salad

With creamy avocado and sweet ripe mango, this cooling salad will complement a meal that’s big on heat and spice.

4/31
Vanilla Layer Cake With Mango Curd

This showstopping tequila-soaked vanilla cake has a sweet mango curd filling that’s set with gelatin so that it doesn’t ooze out when you cut.


5/31
Sweet and Salty Mango Lassi

This cooling Indian yogurt drink with mango and cumin strikes the right balance of sweet and savory. Chef Preeti Mistry recommends adding a splash of white rum “if that’s your thing.”

6/31
Caramelized Plantain Parfait

Pair sliced, spoon-tender fresh mango with caramelized plantains and creamy yogurt for a satisfying dessert that doesn’t feel too heavy.

7/31
Tropi-Cobb Salad

This twist on an old favorite has mango, buttery avocado, curry-spiced chicken, and tart cherry tomatoes. A bright lime dressing brings it all together.

8/31
Halo-Halo

The Filipino dessert layers shaved ice and condensed milk on top of all sorts of texturally contrasting ingredients for a deliciously chewy, crunchy, creamy, sticky, and refreshing result. Watch how it’s made.

Alex Lau
9/31
Mango Toast With Hazelnut-Pepita Butter

Don’t want to make nut butter from scratch? This mango toast is just as delicious with store-bought almond butter—or even granola butter.

10/31
Tomato and Mango Salad in Aguachile

Aguachile is the spicy relative of ceviche that leans heavily on chiles for heat and lime juice for acidity. Here, hearts of palm, mango, and tomatoes replace the traditional raw shrimp.

11/31
Fruit Sandwiches

Mango stars in these snacky little sandwiches (a.k.a. fruit sandos), the delightfully squishy Japanese dessert we can’t get enough of.

12/31
CBD Mango Smoothie

The mangoes and turmeric in this pick-me-up contain vitamins and antioxidants that are said to help brighten dull skin.

13/31
Honeydew, Jicama, and Mango Salad

Don’t worry about removing all of the melon seeds in this take on the popular Mexican street snack—they’re edible and add a little crunch.

14/31
Pistachio and Mango Sans Rival

Fruity and nutty, creamy and crispy, this Filipino sans rival (that’s “unrivaled” in French) is the most beautiful dessert you’ll make this year.

15/31
Grilled Spiced Snapper with Mango and Red Onion Salad

Make this lime- and cilantro-dressed mango salad to spoon over a whole grilled fish and you’ll be tempted to make it again the next weekend to spoon over roasted chicken, a pan-seared pork chop, or simple bowl of steamed rice.

16/31
Beauty-Food Mango Slushy

Mangoes are packed with vitamins C and A, both of which provide major skin-brightening benefits. Lime and chile keep this slushy spicy and bright.

Alex Lau
17/31
Mango and Cucumber Chow

Green mangoes would be ideal for this Jamaican-style salad, but slightly under-ripe mangoes are an imperfect but successful substitute.

Peden + Munk
18/31
Rice Pudding with Ginger, Amaranth, and Mango

Ginger adds bright, zingy flavor to this coconut rice pudding; the crunchy, seedy topping lends a welcome texture contrast.

19/31
Mango-Yogurt Pudding with Lucuma and Chia Seeds

Feel free to sweeten this pudding recipe with more agave, maple syrup, or plain-old sugar if lucuma just isn’t your bag.

Kimberley Hasselbrink
20/31
Greek Yogurt with Spiced Pepita and Cashew Crunch and Mango

A garam masala–spiced mix of nuts and seeds brings life to this easy mango breakfast. If you don't do dairy, a coconut- or cashew-milk yogurt would be ideal.

21/31
Red Snapper and Shrimp Ceviche with Avocado

This dynamic mix of avocados, mango, hearts of palm, piquillo peppers, and rock shrimp comes from Commander's Palace in New Orleans.

22/31
Mango-Chile Ice

We modeled this simple mango sorbet-esque dessert on a favorite paleta, or Mexican ice pop. You won't need an ice cream maker, but do plan ahead so that you have time to purée the mixture in a food processor three separate times for the smoothest texture.

23/31
Vitamin C Superfruit Salad

Feeling under the weather? This superfruit salad will give you the perfect jolt of vitamins you need to get on the path to recovery.

Christina Holmes
24/31
Mango, Berry & Banana Smoothie

Using frozen diced mango is key to this smoothie recipe. It keeps everything else cold—plus frozen fruit is always “in season.”

25/31
Tropical Trifle With Coconut and Rum

This creamy mango dessert features a coconut–chia seed pudding and a rum-soaked combo of fresh fruit (we went with mangoes, bananas, and star fruit, but you could sub in passionfruit, pineapple, kiwi, or whatever tropical fruits you can get your hands on).

26/31
Sticky Rice with Coconut and Mango

For this riff on Thai Khao Niaow Ma Muang, you’ll soak sticky rice overnight in coconut milk, then steam it in a saucepan instead of the traditional bamboo steamer.

Vincent Cross
27/31
Spicy-Sweet Chile Mango Sundae

Grab a pint of mango ice cream or sorbet to make these Mexican-inspired sundaes, which are topped with a syrup of honey, hot sauce, and lime. (Pour in a little tequila and suddenly you’ll have a frozen mango margarita-ish situation.)

Marcus Nilsson
28/31
Green Mango Salad

This Thai salad should be crunchy, fresh, spicy, sour, and a little bit funky. Taste as you go and adjust as needed.

29/31
Citrus Salad on Mango Coulis with Cacao Nibs and Toasted Almonds

A citrus-kissed mango purée is the base for this sweet, juicy, and tart fruit salad. Don’t skip the toasted nuts and cacao nibs, which bring lots of satisfying crunch.

Peden + Munk
30/31
Tropical Carrot, Ginger, and Turmeric Smoothie

A pinch of salt makes everything taste better—including savory smoothies, like this one which also gets coconut water, mango, and a whole orange.

Michael Graydon & Nikole Herriott
31/31
Mango-Lime Curd

This tangy, versatile curd is truly one of our best mango recipes. Use it to fill a layer cake or meringue pie. Layer with whipped cream in a parfait glass. Or, you know, just dip shortbread cookies into it.

