This ancient drink made using mango leaves can manage your diabetes

01/06: Mango leaves are very nutritious
For all those suffering from diabetes, controlling its symptoms can be quite difficult. Keeping a regular track of the blood sugar level is crucial to managing the symptoms as fluctuating or uncontrolled blood sugar level can increase the risk of diabetes, heart stroke or even kidney failure. Not only the medicines that you have been prescribed but the food you eat also plays a major role in dealing with diabetes. But if you are looking for some natural remedies to deal with this health condition, then mango leaves drink can be quite effective. 


02/06: ​Mango - The nutritious summer fruit
Summer is here and so is the season of mangoes. We all know that mangoes are not only tasty, but are highly nutritious too. It is loaded with the benefits of Vitamin K, Vitamin A, Vitamin C, potassium and folate, which is extremely healthy for us. But not many people know that even the leaves of mangoes can prevent several diseases. 


03/06: ​Mango leaves and health benefits
The extract of mango leaves have been used for a long time to cure asthma and it is believed that they are effective in treating diabetes. The leaves contain an abundance of nutrients. These greens are packed with pectin, fiber and vitamin C, which can be beneficial in controlling the blood sugar level.


04/06: ​Help to manage insulin level
As per a study carried out on mice in 2010, mango leaves extract absorbed glucose, which helped to lower the blood sugar levels. The tender green leaves of mangoes contain tannins called anthocyanidins, which is effective in treating early diabetes. They also help to treat diabetic angiopathy and diabetic retinopathy. 


05/06: ​Other health benefits of mango leaves
Being an excellent source of nutrients like vitamin C, fiber and pectin, mango leaves can help to lower the level of bad cholesterol in your body.
Owing to their hypotensive properties, the green leaves can manage the blood pressure and strengthen the blood vessel and treat the problem of varicose veins. Apart from this, they are also quite effective in treating kidney problem and other respiratory problems. 


06/06: ​How to make this mango drink
Preparing this drink is very simple - all you have to do is to boil 10-15 mango leaves in 200 to 250 ml of water. Strain the concoction and leave it overnight. Drink this mango leaves juice the first thing in the morning. Do this regularly for two-three months to see visible result. 