Santalum album - sandalwood, East Indian sandalwood

LOCAL NAMES
Bengali (chandan,sufaid-chandan,peetchandan,srikhanda); Burmese
(santagu); English (sandal,cendana,sandal tree,East Indian
sandalwood,white Indian sandalwood,sandalwood); French (Santal blanc);
German (Weisser Sandel(holz)ßaum); Gujarati (sukhad,sukhet); Hindi
(chandal,srikhanda,chandan,talia-parnam,sandal,safed-
chandan,sriganda); Indonesian (chandan,chendana,cendana); Italian
(Sandalo bianco); Sanskrit (ananditam,chandana,taliaparnam); Spanish
(Sandalo blanco); Tamil
(kulavuri,sandanam,santhanam,srigandam,ulocidam); Trade name (East
Indian sandalwood,sandalwood)
BOTANIC DESCRIPTION
Santalum album is a small evergreen tree that grows to 4 m in Australia,
but in India it is much larger and can grow to a height of 20 m; girth of up
to 2.4 m, with slender drooping branchlets. Bark is tight, dark brown,
reddish, dark grey or nearly black, smooth in young trees, rough with deep
vertical cracks in older trees, red inside.
Leaves thin, usually opposite, ovate or ovate elliptical, 3-8 x 3-5 cm,
glabrous and shining green above, glaucous and slightly paler beneath; tip
rounded or pointed; stalk grooved, 5-15 cm long; venation noticeably
reticulate.
Flowers purplish-brown, small, straw coloured, reddish, green or violet,
about 4-6 mm long, up to 6 in small terminal or axillary clusters, unscented
in axillary or terminal, paniculate cymes.
Fruit a globose, fleshy drupe; red, purple to black when ripe, about 1 cm in
diameter, with hard ribbed endocarp and crowned with a scar, almost
stalkless, smooth, single seeded.
The generic name is derived from the Greek ‘santalon’ meaning
‘sandalwood’, and the species name from the Latin ‘albus’ meaning ‘white’,
in allusion to the bark.
BIOLOGY
Flower panicles appear from March to April in India, and fruits ripen in the
cold season; in Australia flowers appear in December to January and also
June to August, and mature fruit is available from June to September. The
species is spread rapidly through seed dispersal by birds, which feed on
the outer fleshy pericarp. Viable seed production occurs when the tree is 5
years old.
Page 1 of 6Agroforestry Database 4.0 (Orwa et al.2009)
Santalum album
Santalaceae
L.
sandalwood, East Indian sandalwood
ECOLOGY
S. album is indigenous to the tropical belt of the Indian peninsula, eastern Indonesia and northern Australia. There is still
debate as to whether S. album is endemic to Australia or was introduced by fishermen or birds from eastern Indonesia
centuries ago. The main distribution is in the drier tropical regions of India and the Indonesian islands of Timor and
Sumba. The principal sandal tracts are most parts of Karnataka and adjoining districts of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and
Andhra Pradesh in India. The species is mostly found in dry deciduous and scrub forests in this region. The vegetation
type is a typical monsoon vine thicket growing on pure sand. It has been recorded on coastal sand dunes immediately
above the normal high water mark and close to the mangroves. It also grows on low lateritic cliffs above the beach. It is a
partial parasite that attaches to the roots of other trees, it needs ‘nurse’ species in the area of planting out. Host plants
that fix nitrogen and provide light shade are preferred. Senna siamea is good for this, and a most probable natural host is
Drypetes lasiogyna, observed to be the most prolific species in the vicinity of S. album. It does not tolerate frost or
waterlogging, but is drought-hardy and is a light demander in sapling and later stages. Prolonged drought and fire kill
trees.
BIOPHYSICAL LIMITS
Altitude: 600-1 200 m, Mean annual temperature: 2-38 deg. C, Mean annual rainfall: 450-3 000 mm
Soil type: S. album grows in a wide range of soils but is most common in sandy or rocky red soil zones. The species is
not found on black soil but luxuriant growth is noticeable in moist soils such as garden loam and well-drained deep
alluvium. It also grows on ferruginous loam overlying metamorphic rocks, chiefly gneiss is considered the best and trees
avoid calcareous situations. On shallow stony and gravely soils, growth is poor. It is not exacting to soil depth. On Timor
it grows on very stony, grey clay and red loam soils derived from coral parent material, well-drained and having a pH of 8-
9. In India it usually grows on free draining red loams with a pH of 6-6.5, and occasionally on sandy soils associate