Santalum Album – Benefits And Uses

Sandalwood oil has been used to cure headaches, stomachaches, and urinary and vaginal diseases as an antibacterial and astringent.Sandalwood essential oil, emulsion, or paste is used to treat inflammatory and eruptive skin problems in India.

Its enticing perfume soothes the mind and relieves anxiety by calming the central nervous system. It is a great meditation aid, and its natural astringent characteristics help tighten and tone the look of aged skin when used topically.

With a scent that encourages concentration and calmness in meditation and diuretic properties, which aids in the elimination of toxins,Sandalwoodpurifies both the body and mind. It also a relaxant that can be used to treat spasms such as coughs and cramps.

Sandalwoodhas a long history of usage for relaxation and anxiety alleviation due to its deep, woody, earthy aroma.Sandalwoodhas been shown to be useful in reducing anxiety symptoms in studies.Sandalwoodhas also been proven to have sedative properties, lowering alertness and boosting non-REM sleep.
Therapeutic Properties
	
Health Benefits
Reduces anxiety 	Minimises inflammation
Aids with concentration and mental clarity 	Reduces spasms
Aids with insomnia 	Eliminates toxins and excess water
SANDALWOOD IN SKIN CARE

Tighten and tone skin: Sandalwoodenables the body to release toxins and excess water to eliminate puffiness for a more sculpted look.

Fade scars: Sandalwoodfades scars and dark spots while promoting skin cell regeneration to reveal fresh, unblemished skin.

Skin softening: The emollient properties ofsandalwood, combined with its ability to soothe inflammation and irritation, helps to keep skin soft, smooth and supple.

    How to use for face care
    Add one drop of essential oil to one dollop of your face cream or lotion and apply every two days. Do not be tempted to add more oil. Higher doses do not work better than regular applications.

How to use for body care
Use no more than 4 to 5 drops for every 5ml of carrier oil. Massage into affected area in gentle, even motions. If pain persists, consult a professional practitioner.
SANDALWOOD IN HAIR CARE

Prevent hair loss: By tightening skin tissue,sandalwood essential oil strengthens hair roots for a healthier head of hair.

Anti-dandruff: The cooling, anti-bacterial nature ofsandalwoodsoothes sensitive scalps and curbs infections to prevent flaking..

How to use
Dilutesandalwood essential oil with a carrier oil such as jojoba oil, or sweet almond oil and use in a scalp massage oil.
HOW TO USE

- In a nebuliser
- In an oil burner
- In baths or inhalation
Blends well with

Sandalwood oil blends well with bergamot, geranium lavender, rose, ylang ylang, marjoram, frankincense and rosemary.
Caution/Side effects

N/A
Related Products

Sandalwood Essential Oil
Sandalwood Absolute 