Anti-ulcer Activity of Sandalwood (Santalum album L.) Stem Hydro-alcoholic Extract in Three Gastric-Ulceration Models of Wistar Rats

INTRODUCTION
Peptic Ulcer Disease (PUD) encompasses both gastric
and duodenal ulcers. Persisting erosions cause damage
to the stomach wall becoming perforated and
developing peritonitis and massive haemorrhage as a
result of mucus, bicarbonate and prostaglandins
synthesis inhibition (Wallace, 2008). Several factors
influence in the formation of gastric ulcers such as the
stomach infection produced by Helicobacter pylori
(Phillipson et al., 2002), the frequent use of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (Bighetti
et al., 2005) and consumption of alcohol
(Bandyopadhyay et al., 2002). PUD is a serious
gastrointestinal disorder that requires a well targeted
therapeutic strategy (Dharmani and Palit, 2006).
Nowadays, there are two main approaches for treating
peptic ulcer. The first deals with reducing the
production of gastric acid and the second by
reinforcing gastric mucosal protection (Valle, 2005;
Hoogerwerf and Pasricha, 2001). The therapeutic
efficacy of commercially available anti-ulcer drugs in
the treatment of gastric ulcer is usually accompanied
by various side effects (Khan et al., 2011), for
example, H2-receptor antagonists (e.g. cimetidine)
may cause gyneacomastia in men and galactorrhoea in
women (Feldman and Burton, 1990), while proton-
pump inhibitors (e.g. omeprazole and lansoprazole)
can cause nausea, abdominal pain, constipation and
diarrhea (Reilly, 1999; Franko and Richter, 1998). Due
to these problems, there is a need to find new anti-
ulcer agents that are highly effective with potentially
less or no side effects. Medicinal plants have always
been the main source of new drugs for the treatment of
gastric ulcers (Rates, 2001; Borrelli and Izzo, 2000).
Santalum album (L.) is one of the most
important Indian medicinal plants. Traditionally,
Sandalwood is used as an astringent, antipyretic, blood
purifier, disinfectant in bronchial and genitourinary
tract infections, diuretic, expectorant, memory
enhancer, and sedative, tonic for heart, liver and
stomach. Furthermore, it is used in perfume industry.
Various uses mentioned in Ayurveda about
sandalwood include its utilization in the treatment of
several ailments like bleeding piles, diarrhea with
internal bleeding, eye infections, hemorrhage,
hiccoughs, inflammation of umbilicous, poisoning,
initial phase of pox, urticaria and vomiting (Desai and
Hirenath, 1991; Kirtikar and Basu, 1933). It is
reported to possess anti-bacterial activity against
Staphylococcus aureus (Shankaranaryana, 1986) and
anti-fungal activity against Microsporum canis,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes and T. rubrum
(Chaumont and Bardey, 1989). The essential oil of S.
album was tested for in-vitro anti-viral activity against
Herpes simplex viruses-1 and -2. It inhibited the
replication of these viruses in a dose-dependent
manner and was more effective against HSV-1. The
oil did not exhibit virucidal and cytocidal activities at
the concentrations tested (Benencia and Courrèges,
1999).
The phytochemical and pharmacological
investigations proved the presence of antioxidant
principles that justify their traditional medicinal values
(Scartezzini and Speroni, 2000). S.album and other
Indian medicinal plants were tested in-vitro for their
possible regulatory effect on nitric oxide (NO) levels
using sodium nitroprusside as NO donor. Most of the
plant extracts demonstrated significant direct dose
dependant scavenging activity on NO (Jagetia and
Baliga, 2004). α-Santalol, an active component of
sandalwood essential oil has been studied for skin
cancer preventive efficacy in murine models of skin
carcinogenesis employing human epidermoid
carcinoma A-431 cells. α-santalol at concentrations of
25-75 μl resulted in concentration and time dependant
decrease of cell number, which was largely due to cell
death. Mechanistic studies showed involvement of
caspase-3 activation and poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase cleavage, disruption of the mitochondrial
membrane potential and cytochrome-C release into the
cytosol, thereby suggesting involvement of both
caspase-dependant and independent pathways (Kaur,
2005).
The sandalwood oil at a dose of 200 mg/kg
showed highly significant antipyretic effect against
yeast induced pyrexia in albino rats; 0.2% of Tween
80 and Paracetamol 100 mg/kg were used as control
and standard respectively (Desai and Hirenath, 1991).
Santalols have been reported to possess a significant
anti-inflammatory property, in several experimental
models (Sindhu et al., 2010). Experimental assays also
revealed the anti-inflammatory effect of sandalwood
oil and HESP (Hydrolyzed Exhausted Sandalwood
Powder) oil against formalin induced paw oedema in
albino rats at a dose of 200 mg/kg, using 0.2% tween
80 as control and phenylbutazone 150 mg/kg as
standard. A significant reduction in oedema was
observed in case of HESP (Sivaramakrishnan and
Shankaranarayana, 1990; Shankaranarayana and
Kamala, 1989; Shankaranaryana and Parathasarthi,
Ahmed et al. Anti-ulcer activity of Santalum álbum L. stem hydro-alcoholic extract in gastric-ulceration models
Boletín Latinoamericano y del Caribe de Plantas Medicinales y Aromáticas/83
1985). Sandalwood oil (8 mg/kg) and HESP (10
mg/kg) produced prolonged decrease in carotid blood
pressure, increase in heart rate and respiration in
healthy adult mongrel dogs (10-12 kg) anaesthetized
with pentobarbitone (35 mg/kg) (Sindhu et al., 2010).
The sandalwood oil as well as HESP oil was studied
for sedative effect on albino mice of either sex at
500/600 mg/kg as well as 600/800 mg/kg respectively
using 0.2% Tween 80 as control. Severe depression
occurred with death at LD50 of 558.0 and 747.6 mg/kg,
respectively (Shankaranarayana and Kamala, 1989).
Some clinical studies were also conducted
with S. album. Kuan- Xiong aerosol containing
sandalwood oil along with oils of Piper longum,
Dryobalanops aromatica, Asarum seiboldi, and
Alpinea officinarum. They produced an immediate and
quick relief in anginal pain in 69 cases of angina
pectoris in comparison with nitroglycerine. Further
studies revealed a different mechanism of action from
that of nitroglycerine (Guo et al., 1983). A polyherbal
eye drop preparation containing S. album Linn.,
Azadirachta indica A. Juss., Eclipta alba Hassk., Vitex
negundo Linn., Moringa oleifera Lam., Boerhaavia
diffusa Linn., Rosa moschata Mill, Macuillamia
rotundifolia (Michx.) were studied in refractive error
or cataract situations for six months. Some
improvements were noted in the associated symptoms
and subjective improvements of vision were reported
by some patients. No side effects of the drug were
reported by any patient (Mrinal, 1985).
S. album is one of the potential anti-ulcer
plants used in Unani system of medicine (Jamal et al.,
2006). Recently a polyherbal preparation, UL-409
containing six medicinal plants namely Santalum
album L., Glycyrrhiza glabra L., Saussurea lappa CB
Clarke, Aegle marmelos Corr., Foeniculum vulgare
Mill., Rosa damascena Mill. at a dose of 600 mg/kg,
significantly prevented the occurrence of ulcerations
induced by stress, aspirin and alcohol in albino wistar
rats (Venkataranganna et al., 1998). In another study,
UL-409 increased the stomach mucus and decreased
the acid volume, the free and total acid contents in
rats. Moreover, significantly prevented the occurrence
of cold-restraint stress induced ulcerations. Also,
significantly inhibited gastric ulceration induced by
alcohol and aspirin, as well as cysteamine and
histamine induced duodenal ulcers in rats and guinea
pigs, respectively. (Mitra et al., 1996; Kulkarni and
Goel, 1996). Though S. album is one of the
traditionally used anti-ulcer plants in Unani medicine
and a component of certain polyherbal preparations for
prevention and healing of gastric ulcers, no attempts
were made to assess anti-ulcer potential of
Sandalwood alone.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Extraction of Plant material and Phytochemical
Screening
S. album Stem was collected from forest area around
Yelhanka Railway Station in January (2011) and
authenticated at the Department of Botany, Bangalore
University. Approximately 1000 g of S. album stem
powder was extracted in 40% ethanol in water by
soxhletion. The plant material and solvent were taken
in 1:5 ratio. S. album stem hydro-alcoholic Extract
(SASE) was processed at Green Chem Laboratory,
Bangalore. The extracted material was delivered as
gift sample (Batch No: SWSE/RD/01). SASE was
later subjected to preliminary phytochemical screening
to identify the presence of phyto constituents (Kokate
et al., 2007; Khandelwal, 2004; Harborne, 1978).
Experimental Animals
Albino Wistar rats of either sex weighing 150-200 g
were housed under standard conditions at 25 ± 5 ºC in
a well-ventilated animal house approved by
Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision
on Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA Nº
IAEC/37/10) under 12:12 h light - dark cycle. The
experimental protocol (IAEC/NCP/37/10) was
approved by Institutional Animal Ethical Committee,
Nargund College of Pharmacy, Bangalore.
Oral Acute Toxicity Study and Selection of test doses
A safe oral dose of SASE was determined through the
acute oral toxic test in rats as described by the
Organization of Economic Co-Operation and
Development (OECD) as per 423 guidelines (OECD
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, 2010). The
SASE at a limit dose of 5000 mg/kg was administered
orally to three rats and observed for behavioral
changes, any toxicity and mortality up to 48 h. The
extract was prepared by dissolving the commercial
extract in distilled water and the concentration was not
to exceed the dose of 1 ml/100 g by weight. The test
doses for evaluation of anti-ulcer activity were
selected based on the oral acute toxicity testing.
Evaluation of anti-ulcer activity
Acute water immersion restraint stress (CRS)
(Kulkarni and Juvekar, 2008)
Low (250 mg/kg p.o.) and high dose (500 mg/kg p.o.)
of SASE and Omeprazole 10 mg/kg p.o. were
Ahmed et al. Anti-ulcer activity of Santalum álbum L. stem hydro-alcoholic extract in gastric-ulceration models
Boletín Latinoamericano y del Caribe de Plantas Medicinales y Aromáticas/84
administered 1 hour prior subjecting the rats to stress
(Surendra, 1999). The ulcers were induced in animals
by keeping in a plastic restrainer at a temperature of
20 ̊C, making them immobile and placing vertically
with heads facing upwards in holes of stainless steel
water bath of dimensions (12.7 cm × 45.7 cm × 45.7
cm) consisting of 12 holes at its top having a diameter
of 3 inches, filled with water up to the xiphoid level
for a period of 3 hours daily. Same procedure was
followed for 10 day. Animals were fasted for 24 hours
until the ninth day. On day 10 after subjecting the rats
to the stress, stomachs were isolated and cut opened
along the greater curvature. The ulcer index and ulcer
score were determined. Later, the stomachs were
subjected to histopathological examination.
A. Ulcer scoring and ulcer index determination: For
ulcer scoring, the stomachs were washed with saline
water to look for ulcers in the glandular portion of the
stomach. The number of ulcers per stomach was noted
and severity of the ulcers was scored microscopically
with the help of the hand lens (10 X) and scoring was
done as per (Vogel, 2008).
0 = no ulcer
1 = superficial ulcer
2 = deep ulcer
3 = perforation
The Ulcer index (UI) was calculated by the following
formula:
UI = UN +US +UP×10-1
UN = average number of ulcer per animal
US = average severity score
UP = percentage of animal with ulcers
The percentage inhibition was calculated by the
following formula:
% Inhibition = [(UI control – UI treated) / UI control] x 100
B. Histopathological studies: The isolated stomachs
were kept in formalin solution (15%) then sent to
pathologist for histological examination by
Haematoxylin and Eosin staining and morphological
observations with 100 X and 400 X.
Experimental Design: Briefly, the animals were
divided into five groups (n = 6) and treated with the
respective test solutions as given below:
Group I: (Normal control): Received distilled water.
Group II: (Negative control): Received stress three
hours a day for a period of 10 days.
Group III: (Standard drug + Stress). Received
standard drug Omeprazole 10 mg/kg p.o. one hour
before three hours of stress for a period of 10 days.
Group IV: (Test drug Dose I + Stress). Received test
drug (SASE 250 mg/kg) one hour before three hours
of stress for a period of 10 days.
Group V: (Test drug Dose II + stress). Received test
drug (SASE 500 mg/kg) one hour before three hours
of stress for a period of 10 days.
Acute Ethanol (Et-OH) induced ulcer
(Majumdar, 1999)
Animals were treated with distilled water,
Omeprazole, SASE 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg orally
for 10 days and kept for 24 hours fasting until the
ninth day. Animals were treated with test extract and
standard drug, Omeprazole (10 mg/kg p.o.) one hour
before ethanol administration on 10th day. Ethanol
(60%) was administered to every animal at a dose of 1
ml/200 g by weight on day 10. One hour later all the
animals were sacrificed, the stomachs were isolated
and ulcer index, ulcer score was determined and
histopathological studies were performed as
mentioned earlier. Briefly, the animals were divided
into five groups (n = 6) and treated with the respective
test solutions as given below:
Group I: (Normal control): Received distilled water.
Group II: (Negative Control): Received Ethanol 1
ml/200 g by weight on day 10.
Group III: (Ethanol + Omeprazole): Received
Omeprazole 10 mg/kg for 10 days and Ethanol 1
ml/200 g by weight on day 10.
