Phytochemistry and Pharmacology of Santalum album L.: A Review

www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1854
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and highly active against Candida albicans.[127] Sandal wood oil
showed anti-dermatophytic activity against Microsporum canis, Trichophyton rubrum and
Trichophyton mentagrophytes.[128]
Besides, the sandalwood oil constituents, -and -santalol were active against Salmonella
typhimurium and Staphylococcus aureus whereas epi--santalene was found to be active
against S. typhimurium.[128] Santalbic acid (trans-11-octa-decen-9-ynoic acid), a major
constituent of the seed, was found to inhibit gram positive bacteria and several pathogenic
fungi.[129] Santalols in high and/or medium concentrations found to be active against yeast,
gram positive and negative bacteria, showing better antimicrobial efficacy even in low
concentrations.[121] Further, immature tree shoots were also shown to be antibacterial against
13 bacterial strains.[130]
Antifungal Activity
Sandalwood oil is reported to possess anti-fungal activity against Microsporum canis,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes and T. rubrum.[131] Sandalwood oil was found to be effective
against human pathogenic fungal strains Microsporum canis, Trichophyton mentagrophytes
and T. rubrum but was ineffective against Candida albicans, Aspergillus niger and A.
fumigates.[132]
Antiviral Activity
The anti-viral activity of sandalwood has also been established through biological studies.
Sandalwood oil has been shown to be used in prevention and treatment of warts, skin
blemishes and other viral induced tumours on skin.[133-134] Traditional medicine system
including Ayurvedic and Chinese medicine also mention about the antiviral potency
sandalwood oil.[135] In an in vitro study, sandalwood oil demonstrated antiviral activity
against Herpes simplex viruses (HSV)-1 & 2 in a dose-dependent manner through inhibition
of viral replication. It was further assumed that sandalwood oil helped protect the cells by
modulating liver’s gluthatione, S-transferase and levels of acid-soluble sulfhydryl.[136]
Sandalwood oil showed in vitro inhibitory effect against herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
on RC-37 cells. Interestingly, sandalwood oil only affected the virus before adsorption into
the cells by some non-specific inhibition of interaction between the virus and host cells.[25]
Sandalwood oil constituents, - and -santalols, their mixtures and derivatives have been
implicated in treatment of warts in human, especially HPV and DNA pox virus that causes
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1855
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Molluscum contagiosum and speculated to be a cure against HIV and other RNA viruses, as
well as dryness, flakiness and dryness associated with seborrheaic dermatitis, psoriasis and
allergic or eczematous rashes of the skin as well as in the treatment of acne lesions of the face
and the body and in the eradication of pustular acne lesions caused by staphylococcal acne
and streptococcal bacterial infections. Additionally, sandalwood oil and santalol derivatives
claimed for use in treating cold sores and herpes.[137] Recently, single cell and somatic
embryo suspension cultures of Indian sandalwood tree is demonstrated as the alternative and
renewable resource of shikimic acid, the precursor for industrial-scale synthesis of Tamiflu,
the sole commercially available neuraminidase inhibitor drug against Influenza A virus.[138]
Antioxidant efficacy
The phytochemical and pharmacological investigations proved the presence of antioxidant
principles that justify their traditional medicinal values.[139] S. album and other Indian
medicinal plants were tested in-vitro for their possible regulatory effect on nitric oxide (NO)
levels using sodium nitroprusside as NO donor. Most of the plant extracts demonstrated
significant direct dose dependant scavenging activity on NO.[140] It has been reported to have
nitrous oxide scavenging activity and DPPH antioxidant activity.[140,141] Santalum album can
protect cardiac tissue from oxidative stress induced cell injury and lipid peroxidation and also
interferes with DOX-induced inflammatory and apoptotic induction in cardiac tissue.[142]
Recently, an anthocyanic pigment cyanidin-3-glucoside from S. album was shown to be
antioxidant and nutritionally important.[143] Additionally, in a comparative study it was shown
that in vitro grown callus cells demonstrated comparable antioxidant activities with
sandalwood oil, using nine in vitro antioxidant tests.[144] Sandalwood oil increased
glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity and acid soluble sulfhydryl (SH) levels in the liver of
adult male Swiss albino mice.[145] Enhanced GST activity and acid-soluble SH levels were
suggestive of a possible chemopreventive action of sandalwood oil on carcinogenesis through
a blocking mechanism. Similarly, methanolic extracts of sandalwood demonstrated acetyl
cholinesterase inhibitory and DPPH and super oxide free radical scavenging activities in
albino mice, there by indicating potential to tackle dementia and memory loss, associated
with Alzheimer's disease. Recently, anti-hyperglycemic and antioxidant potential of
sandalwood oil and its major constituent -santalol in alloxan- and D-galactose mediated
oxidative stress induced diabetic male Swiss albino mice models has been demonstrated in an
in vivo study.[146]
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1856
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Haemolytic activity
Haemolytic activity of any compounds is an indicator of general cytotoxicity towards normal
healthy cells.[147] In a study, it was found that leaf extract of the plant produced the lyses of
RBC. However, this haemolytic activity only takes place with parenteral administration. The
study revealed that the leaves of the plant contained saponins responsible for haemolytic
activities against blood.[148]
Anticancer activity
Investigations have shown the chemo-preventive effects and molecular mechanisms of -
santalol on skin cancer development in both animal models and skin cancer cell lines.[149]
Anticancer effects of oil has been reported in chemically-induced skin carcinogenesis in CD-
1 and SENCAR mice, ultraviolet-B-induced skin carcinogenesis in SKH-1 mice and in vitro
models of melanoma, non-melanoma, breast and prostate cancer and its ability to induce cell-
cycle arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells has also been demonstrated.[150] Sandalwood oil
constituent, -santalol delayed the papilloma development in both strains of mice.[151] Alpha-
santalol at a concentration of 25-75 μM has been found to induce apoptotic death of human
epidermal carcinoma A431 cells via caspase activation together with loss of mitochondrial
potential and cytochrome release.[152] In a similar study, in female hairless mice strain SKH-1,
topical application of -santalol demonstrated chemopreventive effects as observed from
reduced ornithine decarboxylase activity, tumour incidence, and multiplicity.[153] Moreover,
-santalol was shown to delay skin tumour development, reduced tumour multiplicity,
inhibited in vitro lipid peroxidation in skin and liver microsomes and hence prevented UVB-
induced skin tumour development possibly by acting as an antiperoxidant.[154] Alpha-santalol
reported to increase significantly apoptosis related proteins, caspases 3 and 8 levels and
tumour suppressor protein p53, via an extrinsic pathway in UV B induced skin tumour
development model in SKH-1 mice.[155] In human prostate cancer cells, -santalol induced
apoptosis by causing caspases-3 activation.[156] About six novel sesquiterpenoids, two
aromatic glycosides and several neolignans were identified from sandalwood heartwood
chips, which were evaluated for in vitro Epstein-Barr virus early antigen (EBV-EA)
activation in Raji cells, for assessing antitumor promoting activity. Further, in vivo two-stage
carcinogenesis assays demonstrated its potent inhibitory effect on EBV-EA activation strong
suppressive effect on two-stage carcinogenesis on mouse skin.[157] Moreover, derivatives of
-santalol demonstrated tumour-selective cytotoxicity in HL-60 human promyelocytic
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1857
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
leukemia cells and TIG-3 normal human diploid fibroblasts.[158] Two lignans obtained from
the heartwood samples, demonstrated apoptosis induced tumour cell cytotoxicity against HL-
60 human promyelocytic leukemia cells and A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells.[27] α-
Santalol, an active component of sandalwood essential oil has been studied for skin cancer
preventive efficacy in murine models of skin carcinogenesis.[159]
Antipyretic activity
The sandalwood oil at a dose of 200 mg/kg showed highly significant antipyretic effect
against yeast induced pyrexia in albino rats.[8]
Antiinflammatory activity
Santalols have been reported to possess a significant anti-inflammatory property, in several
experimental models.[33] Santalum album possessed anti-inflammatory and antiulcer activities
as evidenced by its significant inhibition in the carrageenan induced paw edema, cotton pellet
induced granuloma, as well as pylorus ligation induced ulcer. These findings could
substantiate the inclusion of this plant in the effective management of inflammatory disorders
like ulcer in traditional system of medicine. The in vitro antioxidant (and in vivo analgesic
and antiinflammatory activities in mice were established for methanolic extracts of
heartwood.[160]
Antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect
Studies on antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect of long-term oral administration
of petroleum ether fraction of sandalwood in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats showed
reduction in blood glucose level. Metformin treated group also showed a decrease in blood
glucose as against an increase in diabetic control group. Further, total cholesterol (TC), low
density lipoprotein (LDL) and triglyceride (TG) levels were decreased in treated diabetic rats
whereas, cardioprotective, high density lipoprotein (HDL) were increased. Significant
improvement in atherogenic index was observed that led to the conclusion that S. album has
potential antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic activities.[161]
Cardioprotective activity
Aqueous extract of sandalwood reported to inhibit significantly the cardiac tissue damage by
reducing lipid peroxidation on doxorubicin induced cardiotoxicity in rat model[162] and
significant protective effect against ISO induced myocardial infarction in albino Wistar rats
in dose dependant manner.
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1858
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Physiological effects
Sandalwood oil and its major constituent, -santalol are found to affect several physiological
functions and sensory stimulation. The oil reported to elevate pulse rate, skin conductance
level and systolic blood pressure whereas -santalol elicited higher ratings of attentiveness
and mood than the oil.[163] Inhalation of sandalwood oil reported to improve audibility.[164]
Recently, sandalwood tea was demonstrated to increase significantly the myocardial
contractility and heart rate of the isolated and failed frog heart, while it showed good effect as
anti-fatigue in contracting the smooth muscle of isolated rabbit aortic strips.[165] Sandalwood
oil did not demonstrate any phototoxic effects though occasional cases of irritation or
sensitization reactions in humans are reported.[166]
Metabolic effects
Sandalwood oil reported to demonstrate changes in neonatal hepatic xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes in suckling mouse pups on trans-mammary exposure. It is further observed that
sandalwood oil and its constituents passed through milk and modified the hepatic xenobiotic
metabolizing enzymes such as increased hepatic glutathione-S-transferase, glutathione
reductase and glutathione peroxidase activities, with concomitant increase in hepatic
cytochrome b5 and acid soluble sulfhydryl contents and lowering of hepatic cytochrome P
450 content.[167]
Genotoxicity effects
The DNA damaging activity of sandalwood oil in Bacillus subtilis was studied and was found
to be non-genotoxic.[168] Similarly, sandalwood oil-induced inhibition of B. subtilis showed it
to be non-genotoxic.[169]
Genitourinary system effects
Genitourinary tract infections such as cystitis and gonorrhea have been treated by sandalwood
oil for years owing to the astringent properties of the oil and its effect on the mucus
membranes of genitourinary tract; helps remove mucous congestion, restore mucous
membrane and minimize the risk of infections such as herpes virus.[170] These traditional uses
make sandalwood oil suitable for anti-ageing skin care, for toning effects and to prevent skin
from ugly scars in modern cosmeceutical applications.
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1859
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Insecticidal activities
Sandalwood oil acts as a repellent against Varroa jacobsoni [171] in honey bee colonies thus
used as an acaricide. A modest activity against Lycoriella mali (the mushroom fly) is also
reported.[172] The oil was also found to be impenetrable to termites.[173] Owing to its acaricidal
and oviposition deterring effects, santalol is found to be active against spider mites
Tetranychus urticae.[174-176]
Dietary aspects
Sandalwood oil is considered safe as a flavouring ingredient with a daily consumption 0.0074
mg/kg and has a long history of oral use as dietary supplements without any reported adverse
effects.[166] Sandalwood oil was shown to have inhibitory action on hyperactive small
intestine movement in mice, thereby showing antagonistic action on intestinal spasm caused
by acetylcholine, histamine and barium chloride.[177] Furthermore, it was recently shown that
leaf extracts of sandalwood tree demonstrated antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic
effects in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats.[161]
Aromatherapy
Sandalwood oil is relaxing, soothing, cooling, sensual and valued for its own sweet, warm,
rich balsamic aroma. It is an excellent addition to massage and facial oils, bath oils,
aftershaves, lotions and creams. It blends especially well with floral or other oils dominated
by their top or middle notes, but works with almost any oil providing or enhancing the base
note and lending its fixative ability. It is suited for both feminine and masculine formulas. It
is suitable for all skin types and is especially useful for chapped, dry, sensitive or inflamed
skin. It promotes restful sleep and helps to ease an anxious mind. It is grounding in times of
emotional distraction and helps bring peace and acceptance in times of loss. Sandalwood oil
can be used in modern aromatherapy for treating several conditions. Due to its emollient
properties, Sandalwood is very much used for skin care. The oil has a relaxing effect on the
nerves and may be used for hot, agitated emotional states leading to conditions such as
headaches, insomnia and nervous tension. It can be used in cases of respiratory tract
infections, chronic bronchitis involving a chronic dry cough, especially when its soothing,
demulcent effects are required.[20-22,35] Sandalwood is an astringent and helps to resolve
mucous congestion. Sandalwood oil helps to restore the mucous membrane and minimise the
risk of infection.[32] Has been used for years for genitourinary tract infections e.g. Cystitis and
gonorrhoea. When applied to the skin, sandalwood oil is soothing, cooling and moisturising
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1860
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
and primarily used for dry skin conditions caused by loss of moisture and skin inflammations.
It may be used to relieve eczema and psoriasis and for the treatment of oily skin and acne.
There are two major modes of administer including topical application (e.g. massage,
compress, bath, sitz bath, douche, ointment, skin care, etc) and inhalation (e.g. direct
inhalation, diffuser, oil, vaporiser and steam inhalation.[32]
RESEARCH PROSPECTS
Phytochemical research has led to the isolation and characterization of an impressive number
of biologically active chemical constituents from sandalwood and its oil.[178] Yet, possibilities
are there for finding novel chemical entities. Pharmacological investigation have not only
validated the traditional medicinal practices but also discovered several new therapeutic
potential of sandalwood and its constituents.[179] S. album oil has been used in preparation of
Chinese medicine for treating coronary heart disease,[180] depression and bone fracture,[181]
poliosis,[182] schizophrenia,[183] alcoholic hepatitis,[184] controlling blood sugar without risk of
hypoglycaemia[185] and development of various cosmetic products.[186]
Recent pharmacological and clinical studies have found sandalwood constituents to
demonstrate mammalian DNA polymerase-inhibitory, cancer cell growth inhibitory,
antiallergic, and anti--hexosaminidase release activity and antioxidant activity.[187] Most of
the biological activities have been attributed to the sesquiterpenoids constituents including -
and -santalenes and santalols. Now it has been made possible to clone and characterize a
number of genes and encoded enzymes responsible for santalene biosynthesis.[188] This
accomplishment has directed towards the possibility for better understanding of the
biosynthetic routes, phytochemical diversity of bioactive santalols through genetic approach.
Also, the microbial metabolic engineering approaches paved the path to obtain diversity of
sandalwood sesquiterpenoids in desirable quantities for flavour and fragrance industry.[189]
With escalating global demands, biotechnological means may facilitate productivity
enhancement of Sandalwood resource and bioactive constituents. Furthermore,
bioinformatics approaches and softwares have been developed for prediction and detection of
natural products from genomic sequences to facilitate industrial high-throughput screening in
drug discovery.[190] Recent improved analytical tools and techniques including precision
chromatography systems (like MDGC, GC-MS)[191] and spectroscopic techniques for quality
control[192-193] have facilitated addressing the complex research and analytical needs.
Furthermore, it has been recently stressed that Ayurvedic wisdom, traditional documented
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1861
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
use, tribal non-documented use and exhaustive literature search should be applied to
synergize efforts in drug discovery from plant sources and identification of appropriate
candidate plants.[194] With global upsurge in interest for plant derived products owing to
adverse side effects of their synthetic counterparts, researchers are striving hard to develop
new efficacious pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and cosmeceuticals of plant origin deriving
clues from the treasure of traditional and ehthnobotanical knowledge Research endeavours
are not confine only to isolation and characterization of new molecular entities but also
scientific validation of traditional herbal formulations with strong scientific evidence. A
number age old therapeutic applications of sandalwood and its essential oil are yet to be
scientifically validated, which provides opportunity for chemo-biological research and
clinical studies.
Global sandalwood resources are diminishing and the demand is increasing.[195] The natural
population of Sandalwood tree is alarmingly threatened by mycoplasmal spike disease, illegal
poaching and over exploitation to meet the rising global demands that have resulted in the
tree being inducted into International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of
Threatened Species as vulnerable.[196] Hence, in vitro micropropagation in the form of
callusing, somatic embryogenesis, regeneration protocols, somatic embryo production[197]
possessing greater accumulation of sandalwood oil constituents198] may provided immense
scopes for biotechnological means of conservation of the species.
CONCLUSION
Santalum album is one of the most famous and widely used plants in perfumery and
cosmetics. Apart from perfumery and cosmetics uses, sandalwood also has a wide range of
pharmacological activities and the plant can be considered as one of the important medicinal
plants. Since last two decades, this plant has been studied extensively but still there is lot of
scope to exploit full potential of uses of sandalwood for mankind. Researchers across the
globe have been focussing on the study of interesting chemical constituents especially
sesquiterpenoids of sandalwood for more than a century with regard to their structure, ,
synthesis and pharmacological effectiveness. With recent upsurge in research endeavours to
verify the traditional healthcare uses of essential oil and their constituents by modern
experimental approaches that have provided momentum to in depth pharmacological and
mechanistic investigations. Various studies have established the versatile pharmacological
effectiveness of sandalwood and its oil ranging from antibacterial to anticancer. It also shows
www.wjpr.net Vol 4, Issue 10, 2015. 1862
Rakesh et al. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
prominent activity in various skin diseases. There are few toxicological studies on
sandalwood. It is necessary to summaries all activities reported about this plant. This review
consolidates different reported activities of sandalwood plant as well as its oil