WHITE SANDAL (SANTALUM ALBUM L.), A PRECIOUS MEDICINAL AND TIMBER YIELDING PLANT : A SHORT REVIEW

ntroduction
Its wood known commercially as ‘East Indian
Sandalwood’ and essential oil from it as ‘East Indian
Sandalwood Oil’ are among the oldest known perfumery
materials. Both wood and oil are used in incense,
perfumes and in medicine and are of great commercial
importance. Sandalwood being closely grained and
amenable to carrying, is some of the finest woods for
the purpose. It is used for making idols, boxes and other
curios of exquisite beauty (Srinivasan et al., 1992). Power
of heartwood upon steam distillation yields the East
Indian Sandalwood oil which is rated very high for its
sweet fragrant, persistent, spicy, warm, woody note, non-
varying composition and fixative property. Apart from it
importance as a supremely satisfying source of fragrance,
it finds use in medicine as an antiseptic, antipyretic,
antiscabietic, diuretic, expectorant, stimulant and for
treatment of bronchitis, dysuris, gonorrhea and urinary
infections (Das, 2013; Das and Tah, 2013; Das and Tah,
2014; Handa et al., 1951; Okasaki and Oshima, 1953;
Winter, 1958; Dastur, 1962; Jain, 1968). However, its
use as a base of fragrance has far outweighed its use in
medicine. Indian Sandalwood is highly valued for its
fragrant heartwood, which consists of the highest oil (upto
6%) as well as santalol (α & β 90%) contents in oil as
compared to other species of the genus Santalum
(Srinivasan et al., 1992). Sandalwood oil is used in world
– class perfumes due to its excellent fixative properties
& attars in Indian perfumes (Anonymous, 1972).
During 1918, Shastri a renowned chemist who
studied intricacies of soap manufacturing at Landon,
started experimenting natural sandal oil use in soap
industry. In these experiments, sandal oil maintained its
original fragrance & properties intact. The protecting,
smoothening, moisturizing, hydrating and skin anti-
wrinkling properties of sandal oil are praiseworthy even
in the form of soap. Sandalwood is the blend of economic
and traditional culture from time immemorial. It not only
finds its place in the modern era but has a history of
3000 years in the medicinal system of Ayurveda by
Susrutha and Charaka Samhita. Essential oil of Sandal is
formed by the plant cells and reservoir of solar healing
power. It is described as lifeblood of the plant. Marcel
Lavabre, a French Aroma Therapist, went one step ahead
and rightly said “essential oils are the ultimate
manifestation of a plant’s enjoyment of life’’. When one
smells the fragrance, it is the tiny droplets of air borne
essential oil of sandal, which triggers a response in a
olfactory epithelium or smell sensors in roof of the nose.
From here it is just one nerve synapse to the limbic system
of the brain, which regulates motor activities, primary
drives, emotions and memories. Impulses are then
transmitted to the hypothalamus, which regulates bodily
functions like temperature, thirst, hunger, blood sugar
level, growth, sleep and wake patterns, sexual arousal
and the emotion. Ultimately, the pituitary is stimulated
next, which activates the endocrine system which in turn
controls digestion, emotional and sexual behavior,
responses to stress and all metabolic process. Bhat and
Prajapathi (2007) described medicinal and cosmetic uses
of sandal in the context of ancient literature. Madhu et
al. (2014) opined that the oil present in the heartwood of
the tree makes it a unique and valuable asset of the plant
kingdom. Sandalwood is used to make artifacts and
intrinsic carvings and its oil is used in manufacturing
perfumes, incense sticks and in medicines.
Medicinal uses
Ayurveda translates into English as the Science of
Life (Ayur - life, veda - science). Ayurveda is the oldest
*Author for correspondence : E-mail: nirupama1963@gmail.com
A Short Review on White Sandal Plant 1049
and most developed life science of natural healing in the
world. Life is the outcome of the union of body (Sharir),
sense organs (Indriya), Psyche (Mana) and Soul (Atma).
Ayurveda is not merely a system of Healing, but an
entire way of life that aims to bring about the perfect
balance of the entire personality - body, mind and spirit.
Ayurveda is based on theory of tridosha of the three
Biological forces - Vata, Pitta and Kapha. Disease arises
when there is an imbalance among the three Doshas and
aim of the therapy is to bring about the required
equilibrium.
AyurvedaTravelMall.com offers us an opportunity
to combine a Tropical vacation along with Ayurveda
healing or rejuvenation. We offer you a wonderful
selection of Ayurveda health resorts in Kerala, India to
choose from. And a word about Kerala : National
Geographic magazine chose Kerala as one of the 50 must
see places on earth.
Kairali is one of its kind unique and exclusive
Ayurvedic Health Resort at Palakkad, Kerala, South India,
where one could stay in a paradise like atmosphere and
experience various Ayurvedic Therapies. Kairali
Ayurvedic Health Resort is spread across 50 acres of
lush green and beautifully landscaped garden with 30
independent villas designed distinctively different from
each other and having luxurious, comfortable and with
modern facilities.
Kairali is designed to retain traditional values yet
contemporary to suit modern days living. Kairali is the
one and only exclusive Ayurvedic Health Resort
practicing Panchakarma treatments for rejuvenation,
detoxification and treatments for various ailments including
Yoga and Meditation practiced under the supervision of
highly qualified and experienced Doctors.
Other features of Kairali Resort are swimming pool,
indoor recreations, astrologer & palmist on request, full
fledged restaurant, which serves delicious and nutritious
food, library and conference hall with a seating capacity
of 80 people.
Good news to kidney stone patients:
The pain of kidney stones when becomes unbearable,
you start finding remedies, and suddenly think of removing
it, by surgically or ESWL or pcnl. Even after going through
any one of them, you start feeling severe pains within
two three months or two three years, because the
formation process re-mains on.
This is my experience that, those who eat specially
the junk food, they get hard calcium oxalates (hard to
hammer also). And those who have followed Regional
Traditional Food Culture, not gone to any doctors till
now.
There are four types of kidney stones, Calcium
Oxalates, Uric Acid, Struvite and Cystine. 60% to 70%
of the kidney stones patients are of Calcium Oxalates.
Now a days this is widely seen that the young
generation is getting more affected from this kidney stones
disease, due to unhealthy food. And those who eat junk
food, specially the biscuits, cookies, bread (yeast added),
rusk, deep oil fried, roasted, baked, fridge items like chilled
water, soft drinks, ice creams, are also getting affected
their health, by one or the other issues.
‘Health is Wealth’ - the meaning of this can be
understood, only when the pain starts, and the person
starts seeking permanent solution for this disease.
There are so many systems of medicine, among them
all, Ayurveda assures you long term relief for the kidney
stones relief, but the thing is you have to get addicted to
your own Regional Traditional Food Culture, be punctual
for your food, drink water only whenever you feel thirsty,
that too the quantity you actually needed. Don’t suppress
the urge of urination and stool - increases toxins in the
body. It is always wise and better to keep sufficient gap
between two meals, to digest well.
The medicine, which has got more than 35 years
experience, relieves pain and starts dissolving the kidney
stones, for rare people the stones have come out,
otherwise, the stones get dissolved inside only.
Effective Ayurvedic treatment for back pain, knee
joint pain, asthma, diabetes infertility, hair regrowth, knee
pain, dandruff, paralysis,obesity, pimples, migrane, hair
loss, hair fall, skin diseases, fibroids, piles, weight loss,
constipation, acidity, osteoarthritis, cholestrol, jauntice,
sciatica, osteoporosis, hemorrhoids, gastric problms,
spondylitis, cough, insomnia, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis,
PCOS , sinusitis etc.
[On-line free Consultancy: http://
www.krishnenduayur.com/contact.html].
Used internally in chronic bronchitis, a few drops on
sugar giving relief; also in gonorrhoea and gleet; in chronic
cystitis, with benzoic and boric acids. Much used as a
perfume for different purposes. The wood is used for
making fancy articles and is much carved.
Fluid extract, 1 to 2 drachms. Oil, 5 to 20 drops.
Adulterants - Castor oil is often added, and on the
Continent oil of cedar, made by distilling the chips
remaining from the manufacture of lead pencils.
Other Species - Pterocarpus santalinus or
1050 Nirupama Bhattachryya Goswami and Jagatpati Tah
Santalum rubrum (Red Sandalwood), solely used for
colouring and dyeing. Other varieties come from the
Sandwich Islands, Western Australia and New Caledonia.
Allergens
Allergen help from Maharishi Ayurveda; Allergens:
The Ayurvedic solution; Spring does not have to be
synonymous with Allergens; It is helpful for respiratory
immunity.
Amrit protection
Perfect balance in a jar; The inside story of a
powerful Ayurvedic Rasayana; A wonderful Gift from
Nature; A packet of Nature’s inteliigence; An intelligence
compound that helps cells function normally; The best
generalized antioxidant one can take.
Aroma therapy
Ayurvedic aromatherapy; aromatherapy for perfect
balance in every season; using essential oil properly;
aromathersapy oils: the scent of perfection.
Ayurveda experts suggestions for
Balanced weight; children’s health; Detoxification;
Digestion; Energy; Eyes and Ears; Food and beverages;
Hair care; Immunity; Joints and muscles; mind and body
spirit; Skin care; Good sleep; No retension of stress.
Aurvedic Beauty
Simple, sparkling beauty; a unique paradigm of
beauty; How to look more beautiful; anyone can have
beautiful hair; Ayurvedic cure for varicose veins; The
healing bath as a therapeutic activity.
Aurvedic Diet
Ayurvedic comfort foods; Don’t skip breakfast: the
ayurvedic perspective; The Importance of astringent and
bitter taste for balance nutrition; The ayurvedic view on
drinking milk; Super fruits: an ayurvedic view on fruits;
Lightening up: balancing Pitta Dosha; Vata-Pacifying
Nuts; Stay cool: balancing Pitta Dosha; Embracing pure
foods.
Aurvedic Food Tips
Allergy fighters: cilantro and coriander; Simple ways
to minimize acid indigestion;
Balalanced weight control
Vata-related weight imbalances; The Ayurvedic
approach to weight management: tips for pitta-related
weight imbalances; Enhancing the fire elements: a unique
approach to kapha-related weight gain; FAQ: body type,
weight gain and obesity.
Emotional Support
 Beating the Blues: Ayurvedic Insights into
Emotional Health.
 A little something for your mood?
 Ten ways to beat Blues: Ayurvedic
Recommendations for Emotional Health.
 Keep your spirits up a down economy.
Exercise
 Wiping away fatigue.
 Recharge, restore, rejuvenate! The Ayurveda
way to feeling young at any age.
 Are you fighting fir?
 From fighting fatigue to fighting fit: A Practical
Ayurvedic Guide.
Heart health
 Seven common sense Ayurvedic ways with white
sandal solution to keep Heart Healthy.
 Ayurveda for a Healthy Heart.
 Heave a Healthy Heart.
 Your Heart and Secret of Ojas.
 Your Magnificient Heart.
 A new look at cholesterol.
 The wisdom of a Healthy Heart.
 The secret Heart of the rose.
Digestion and Metabolism
 The Maharshi Ayurvedic Approach to Balancing
Cholesterol.
 Strengthen digestion to enhance immunity.
 The facts about cholesterol.
 How can you tell if you have ama?
 The rematkable qualities of Triphala – a famous
and revered Ayurvedic formula along with a tinch
of white sandal dust.
 Taking care of toxins.
 Nourish the liver to live better.
 Ayurvedic liver support.
 Digestion’s hidden power : supporting
transformation.
 Use rejuvenation therapy to restart digestion.
 Give thanks to your digestion.
 Happiness starts in the stomach.
 Digestion and balanced Health.
A Short Review on White Sandal Plant 1051
 Nine essential to support Digestion.
 Upgrading to an Ayurvedic Diet: Five secret for
good digestion.
 Herbs digestion along with white sandal powder
(a needle area only).
 The importance of strong digestion for healthy
living.
Immunity
 Stay sniffle free this winter.
 Turning the heat up on the common cold.
 Ways to boost immunity this winter.
 Keys to respiratory immunity from Maharshi
Ayurveda.
 You can stay healthy this winter.
 Sinus help is on the way.
 Children’s health: stronger immunity through
digestion.
 Prepare for flu season with Ayurvedic
purification. With white sandal mixture.
 Insight into immunity.
 Five defenses against white sandal Ayurvedic
medicines.
 Understanding the six stages of diseases.
 Immune-boosting winter foods and drinks
 Enjoy your youth with a rational harmony.
Joints
 Joint health: flexible for fall.
 Improving joint flexibility using sandal paste or
lotion.
 Ayurvedic help for Achy of Joints.
 Use Maharshi Ayurveda medicine for
osteoporosis, tennis albow, ortho-artharitis (in
shoulder joint), femer bone pain etc. to keep your
health in good condition through yoga and free
hand exercise in a regular manner.
Massage
 Maintain Ayurvedic foot care.
 Use Sesame oil: Revered in Ayurveda for its
Healing properties.
 Use special type of Ayurvedic sandal massage.
 The story of the Next Generation of Skin Care:
Youthful Skin Massage.
 Use Abhyanga – the Ayurvedic daily massage.
 How to do an Ayurvedic Spa Treatment in your
Own Home – follow the advice of any good
Ayurvedic/uninani/allopathy/ homeopathy
medical practitioner.
Menopause
Menopause relief; Menapause can be comfortable
– the Ayurvedic perspective; Relief from hot flashes; the
Ayurvedic way; Pepare a healthy menopause; Managing
menopause naturally with Ayurveda; Menapause re-
defined.
Prostrate Health
A powerful approach to Prostrate health; A
Ayurvedic view on Prostrate health; Maintaining
Prostrate health; Prostrate protection: For Men of a
Certain Age; Ayruvedic Approach to Prostrate health.
Miscellaneous
Rose Halva and Cashew cookies; Balance vata
Dosha with carrot milk; Cook an Ayurvedic Thanks giving
Feast; Ayurvedic recipes for heart; Recipes for fall
cleaning; and Celestial Cilantro Chutney; Pumpkin Soup
and Party Mix; Food and Holiday Ojas; Cooking with
Rose; An Ayurtvedic Lunches; Ayurvedic Rose Petal
Spread Recipes; Vegetable Kichari; Spring Recipes.
Jahan and Rahman (2014) explained that sandal
dissolves inflammation and tumors and stabilizes
palpitation. Sandalwood is used as a disinfectant in
bronchial and genitourinary tract infection. A paste of
the wood is applied in burns, fever and headache. It
relieves thirst. It is also used in acne, biliousness, blood
impurities, bronchitis, cough, depression, diarrhea,
leucorrhoea, menorrhagia and sore throat. It is one of
the potential anti-ulcer drug used in Unani system of
medicine. Various uses mentioned in Ayurveda system
about sandalwood are in treatment of various other
ailments like diarrhoea with bleeding, intrinsic hemorrhage,
bleeding piles, vomiting, poisoning, hiccoughs, initial phase
of pox, urticaria, eye infections and inflammation of
umbilicus (Benencia and Courreges, 1999; Desai et al.,
1991). - santalol, an active principle of Sandalwood oil,
has been studied for its skin cancer preventive efficacy
in murine models of skin carcinogenesis, employing human
epidermoid carcinoma cells. It was assessed whether á-
santalol at concentrations of 25-75 μml resulted in a
concentrations and a time dependant decrease in a cell
number, which was largely due to cell death. Dwivedi et
al. (2014) enumerated that both the sandalwood powder
and its essential oil have been used in Ayurveda for curing
genito-urinary disorders, gastric irritability, dysentery,
excessive sweating, high blood pressure, heart pain,
inducing sleeping, cleaning wounds, respiratory disorders,
fever and different skin diseases.
Religious uses
Sandalwood is often used for rituals or ceremonies
in Hinduism. Sandalwood is considered in alternative
medicine to bring one closer with the divine. Sandalwood
essential oil, very expensive in its pure form, is used
primarily for Ayurvedic purposes and treating anxiety. In
Buddhism, sandalwoods are considered to be of the
Padma (lotus) group and attributed to the Bodhisattva
Amitabha. It is believed that the sandalwood scent helps
to transform one’s desires and maintained a person’s
alertness during meditation. Sandalwood is also one of
the most popular scents used for incense used when
offering incense to the Buddha.
Hinduismm
Sandalwood paste is integral to rituals and ceremonies,
to mark religious utensils and to decorate the icons of the
deities. It is also distributed to devotees, who apply it to
their foreheads or the necks and chests. Preparation of
the paste is a duty fit only for the pure, so is entrusted in
temples and during ceremonies only to priests. The paste
is prepared by grinding wood by hand upon granite slabs
shaped for the purpose. With the slow addition of water,
a thick paste results (called kalabham ” in Malayalam
language and “gandha” in Kannada), which is mixed
with saffron or other such pigments to make chandanam.
Chandanam, further mixed with herbs, perfumes,
pigments and some other compounds, results in javadhu.
Kalabham, chandanam and javadhu are dried and used
as kalabham powder, chandanam powder, javadhu
powder, respectively. Chandanam powder is very
popular in India and is also used in Nepal. In Tirupati after
religious tonsure, sandalwood paste is applied to protect
the skin. In Hinduism and Ayurveda, sandalwood is
thought to bring one closer to the divine. Thus, it is one of
the most used holy elements in Hindu and Vedic societies.
Jainism
Sandalwood use is integral part of daily practices of
Jainism. Sandalwood paste mixed with saffrons used to
worship tirthankar Jain Deities. Sandalwood powder is
showered as blessings by Jain Monks and Nuns (Sadhus
and Sadhvis) to their disciples and followers.
Buddhism
Sandalwood is mentioned in various suttas of the Pâli
Canon. In some Buddhist traditions, sandalwood is
considered to be of the padma (lotus) group and attributed
to Amitabha Buddha. Sandalwood scent is believed by
some to transform one’s desires and maintain a person’s
alertness while in meditation. It is also one of the more
popular scents used when offering incense to the Buddha
and the guru.
Islam
In sufi tradition, sandalwood paste is applied on
the sufi’s grave by the disciples as a mark of devotion. It
is practiced particularly among the Indian Subcontinent
disciples. In the Tamil culture irrespective of religious
identity, sandalwood paste or powder is applied to the
graves of sufis as a mark of devotion and respect.
Chinese and Japanese religions
Sandalwood, along with agarwood, is the most
commonly used incense material by the Chinese and
Japanese in worship and various ceremonies. However,
Taoists are forbidden from using sandalwood (as well
as benzoin resin, frankincense, foreign produced) incense
and instead either use agarwood, or better
still Acronychia pedunculata, in worship (Dastur, 1962).
Zoroastrianism
Zoroastrians offer sandalwood twigs to the
firekeeping priests who offer the sandalwood to the fire to
keep the fire burning. Sandalwood is offered to all of
the three grades of firein the fire temple, including
the Atash Dadgahs. Sandalwood is not offered to
the divo, a homemade lamp. Often, money is offered to
the mobad (for religious expenditures) along with the
sandalwood. Sandalwood is called sukhar in the
Zoroastrian community. The sandalwood in the fire
temple is often more expensive to buy than at a
Zoroastrian store. It is often a source of income for the
fire temple.
Domestic uses
Sandalwood’s main component â-santalol (90%) has
antimicrobial properties. It is used in aroma therapy and
to prepare soaps. Due to this antimicrobial activity, it can
be used to clear skin from spots and blackheads, but it
must always be properly diluted with carrier oil.
Sandalwood paste is used as an embalming paste in
temples on idols. The bindi dot is sometimes created from
sandalwood paste used on forehead during worship.
The essential oil extracted from sandalwood is
beneficial for toning up the skin as well as healing skin
disorders when applied externally. To treat the infected
areas on the skin dilute a few drops of diluted sandalwood
oil in water and soak the affected area with the solution
directly. This will not only help in healing the skin infection
but also tone up the epidermis. Sandalwood together with
agarwood is the most popular and commonly used incense
1052 Nirupama Bhattachryya Goswami and Jagatpati Tah
