Benefits of Hibiscus Oil for Your Hair

Chinese hibiscus (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis) is a popular remedy for hair growth, promoted by herbal healers.
Proponents claim that hibiscus can also help:
stop hair loss
make your hair look healthy and lustrous
prevent premature graying
thicken hair and add volume
treat dandruff
condition against frizz, dryness, and breakage
prevent split ends
These claims aren’t supported by clinical research. Hibiscus, like most herbal supplements, isn’t approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Keep reading to learn more about hibiscus and why people believe it may promote hair growth.
Does hibiscus regrow hair?
Although anecdotal evidence suggests that hibiscus may help promote new hair growth and slow hair loss, much of the available research has been done on animals.
For example, a 2003 study indicated that a leaf extract of Hibiscus rosa-sinensis positively affected hair length and hair follicles in lab rats. The leaf extract was more effective than the flower extract.
Additional studies are needed to prove if hibiscus is effective for regrowing human hair.
How is hibiscus used to grow hair?
Based on anecdotal evidence, hibiscus is widely accepted in India for hair growth and is often used in herbal hair oils.
Herbal hair oils are typically a combination of herbal extracts, such as hibiscus, mixed with a carrier oil base, such as:
almond oil
coconut oil
mineral oil
jojoba oil
olive oil
walnut oil
wheat germ oil
Commonly, practitioners of herbal remedies suggest that you:
Massage the herbal hair oil into your scalp for about 10 minutes.
Leave it in place for about 30 minutes.
Wash with a mild shampoo.
How is hibiscus used to make hair stronger?
Advocates of using hibiscus for strengthening hair often suggest a weekly hibiscus and yogurt mask. Here are the recommended instructions:
Thoroughly combine about 3 tbsp. ground hibiscus leaves and flowers with about 8 tbsp. yogurt.
Gently apply the hibiscus and yogurt mixture to your hair and scalp.
Leave in place for about 30 minutes.
Wash with a mild shampoo.
Some supporters of herbal remedies suggest also adding in additional ingredients to the hibiscus and yogurt mask, such as:
aloe vera gel
honey
coconut milk
HEALTHLINE RESOURCE
Your guide to beauty buzzwords
Confused about which skin care ingredients live up to the hype? You're not alone. Find out which products are worth using or worth skipping.
How is hibiscus used to treat dandruff?
Practitioners of herbal remedies often suggest a weekly anti-dandruff hair mask made with hibiscus and fenugreek:
Thoroughly combine about 3 tbsp. ground hibiscus leaves with about 1 tbsp. powdered fenugreek seeds and about 1/4 cup buttermilk.
Gently apply and massage the hibiscus, fenugreek, and buttermilk mixture to your hair and scalp.
Leave in place for about 1 hour.
Wash with a mild shampoo.
Other beneficial herbs for the hair
Though also unproven, some other popular herbs for hair growth and health include:
bitter apple (Citrullus colocynthis)
brahmi (Bacopa monnieri)
coat buttons (Tridax procumbens)
ginseng (Panax ginseng)
goji berry (Lycium chinense Mill)
gooseberry (Emblica officinalis)
holy basil (Ocimum sanctum)
jatamansi (Nardostachys jatamansi)
night-flowering jasmine (Nyctanthes arbor-tristis)
Oriental arborvitae (Thuja orientalis)
Takeaway
Although some clinical research shows that hibiscus may promote hair growth, testing has only been done on animals.
Unproven anecdotal evidence supports the use of hibiscus for many benefits, including:
hair growth
thick, healthy, lustrous hair appearance
premature graying prevention
dandruff abatement
But hibiscus isn’t approved by the FDA. Talk with a doctor before using it on your hair and scalp.