HIBISCUS FLOWER / ROSA SINENSISAND - MEANING, USES & MEDICAL BENEFITS

HIBISCUS ROSA SINENSIS AND ITS MEDICAL BENEFITS

Hibiscus rosa Sinensis or the Chinese rose is a common flower. Whether the flower originated from China or not is debatable, however, what is beyond doubts is its immense health benefits. The medicinal value of the flower is described in the ancient science, Ayurveda and Chinese herbology. Not just flower, but also the plant and its parts are rich in phytonutrients such as pectin, flavonoids, malic acid, citric acid, etc., and can be used as well as consumed for their therapeutic benefits.  Hibiscus also contains anthocyanin and polysaccharides. No wonder, it is mainly used to make the very popular hibiscus tea.

HIBISCUS FLOWER

The flower is generally huge in size and available in many colours. They are bell-shaped and flared. The long central tube is in the centre with stamens and pistils are at the tip.

The hibiscus plant is a meaningful shrub, which can grow up to 15-feet high. The shiny, dark green leaves are toothed in nature and are alternately arranged.  The flower is also called shoe flower or lipstick flower. Besides, its beauty, the flower is known for its medicinal value.

HIBISCUS FLOWER AND WEIGHT LOSS:

One of the many health benefits of hibiscus flower is weight loss The flower is known to contain hydroxycitric acid, which is a compound also found in weight loss pills. It has been proved scientifically as well that the flower has enzyme inhibitors that help in breaking down the complex sugars and starch, resulting in the reduced absorption by the body. Besides, the diuretic and laxative properties of the flower also help you to lose the water weight.

HIBISCUS FLOWER AND SKIN CARE BENEFITS
[caption id=\"attachment_1636\" align=\"aligncenter\" width=\"424\"] hibiscus flower skin care[/caption]

Hibiscus extracts are used in various skin care products as they contain high levels of Vitamin C in the natural form.  Since the flower also has anti-inflammatory properties, it is used in anti-acne creams too. Want a younger looking and even-toned skin, or need to manage skin conditions such as dermatitis and eczema, hibiscus flowers could be just the thing you need.  Not just skin, the flower’s health medical benefits also extend to hair care such as prevention of dandruff, itchy scalp and hair breakage. Hibiscus hair tonic can be used for the blackening and pre-mature greying of hair.  Its oil is also used to promote hair growth.

HIBISCUS FLOWER AND ITS SLEEP-INDUCING / ANTI-STRESS MEDICINAL PROPERTIES

Hibiscus tea induces sleep and calmness in people. It helps them to get a good night’s sleep. The flavonoids in the flowers work like a charm with the central nervous system and help you stay calm.

HIBISCUS AND WOMEN-RELATED DISORDERS

Hibiscus decoction is known to reduce abdominal cramps and offer Medical relief by controlling excessive bleeding. The flower is also known to provide relief in hot flashes during menopause.

HIBISCUS AND CUISINES MEANING

The flowers are edible and are used in salads for their aroma and flavour. However, its taste is an acquired one and everybody might not like it.

HIBISCUS AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES IN INDIA

The flower is believed to be a favorite of Lord Ganesha.