Hibiscus rosa-sinensis 'Brilliant' (Tropical Hibiscus)

Hibiscus rosa-sinensis 'Brilliant' (Tropical Hibiscus) is a vigorous, well-branched, evergreen shrub noted for its bold, cardinal-red flowers, up to 6 in. across (15 cm). The slightly overlapping petals are ruffled and partially reflexed. Adding contrast is a long red floral tube lined with a bottlebrush of yellow anthers and red stigmas. Blooming nearly year-round in frost-free areas, the flowers stand out against the foliage of oval-shaped, mid-green leaves. A flamboyant addition to the landscape with its dazzling abundance of blooms.
Typically grows up to 8-10 ft. tall (240-300 cm) with a spread of 4-6 ft. (120-180 cm).
A full sun to part shade lover, this plant is best grown in neutral to slightly acidic, moist but well-drained soils. Tropical Hibiscus are easily grown in full sun in northern climates, but they will prefer partial shade in hot and dry climates. Sandy loam soil is ideal.
Indoors: This Tropical Hibiscus requires very bright light to bloom well. A sunny western or southern exposure that has at least 4-5 hours of bright, direct light is best.
Provide a site sheltered from strong winds.
Water freely during the growing season, sparingly in winter. Never allow the soil to dry out to the point of wilting.
Fertilize regularly from spring through fall, but cut back during the winter months.
Tropical Hibiscus add an exotic touch to foundation plantings, and shrub borders, and can be used as flowering hedges. They make terrific accent or specimen plants and can be grown in containers, bringing color to patios and decks.
Hibiscus is not generally a plant that deer or other animals seek out to eat, but if other food sources are scarce, they may come along and make a meal out of your Hibiscus.
Tropical Hibiscus is sensitive to changing conditions. Changes in light or temperature during the growing season may result in bud drop.
Keep an eye out for aphids, mealybugs, scale insects, and powdery mildew.
Pruning improves the shape of your Hibiscus, stimulates vigor and branching (the more branches, the more flowers), while opening up the center to air circulation and sunlight, thereby promoting new flowers. 
Prune in early spring as cooler weather gives way to warm and new growth buds start to swell. Do not wait for these buds to open. 
Propagate by semi-ripe cuttings in summer
Hibiscus rosa-sinensis is probably native to tropical Asia.