Citrus limon (Lemon) Phenomenon

Introduction
Citrus limon (L.) Burm. f. is a tree with evergreen leaves and yellow edible fruits from the family Rutaceae. In some languages, C. limon is known as lemon (English), Zitrone (German), le citron (French), limón (Spanish), and níngméng, 檸檬 (Chinese).
The main raw material of C. limon is the fruit, particularly the essential oil and juice obtained from it. The C. limon fruit stands out as having well-known nutritional properties, but it is worth remarking that its valuable biological activities are underestimated in modern phytotherapy and cosmetology[1].
By cold pressing fresh outer parts of the C. limon pericarp (lat. exocarpium) an essential oil is obtained – the lemon oil (lat. Citrus limon aetheroleum, Limonis aetheroleum, Oleum Citri). The oil is colourless or yellow, and has a characteristic, strong lemon scent[2]. It is considered a pharmacopoeial raw material. Its monographs, entitled 'Limonis aetheroleum', are present in the European Pharmacopoeia 9th[3], American Pharmacopoeia[4], and in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India[5]. Another pharmacopoeial raw material obtained from C. limon is the outer part of the mesocarp – the flavedo. A monograph entitled 'Citrus limon flavedo' can be found in older editions of the French Pharmacopoeia, for example, in its 10th edition from 1998[6]. The fresh fruit of C. limon is officially listed for use in phytotherapy and in homeopathy in Germany. According to the German Commission D Monographs for homeopathic medicines, C. limon fresh fruits can be used for treating gingival bleeding and debilitating diseases[7]. C. limon also has a positive opinion in the European Commission’s Cosmetics Ingredients Database (CosIng) as a valuable plant for cosmetics production[8]. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) classified the pericarp, fruit, and leaves of C. limon as raw materials of plant origin in which there is presence of naturally occurring ingredients that may pose a threat to human health when used in the production of food and dietary supplements. EFSA has made a remark that the toxic substances in these raw materials are photosensitizing compounds belonging to the furanocoumarin group, including bergapten and oxypeucedanin[9]. In the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) list, C. limon essential oil and extracts are classified as safe products[10] .
The biological potential of C. limon is determined by its rich chemical composition. It has been determined not only for the whole fruit but also separately for the pericarp, juice, pomace, leaves, seeds and essential oil[11][12][13][14][15]. The most important group of bioactive compounds in both C. limon fruit and its juice, determining their biological activity, are flavonoids such as: flavonones – eriodictyol, hesperidin, hesperetin, naringin; flavones –  apigenin, diosmin; flavonols – quercetin; and their derivatives. In the whole fruit, other flavonoids are additionally detected: flavonols – limocitrin and spinacetin, and flavones – orientin and vitexin[11][12][14]. Phenolic acids were found both in the juice and fruit. There are mainly two such compounds in the juice – ferulic acid and synapic acid, and their derivatives. In contrast, the presence of p-hydroxybenzoic acid has been confirmed in the fruit. In the fruit, there are also coumarin compounds, carboxylic acids, carbohydrates, as well as amino acids, a complex of B vitamins, and what is particularly important – vitamin C (ascorbic acid)[11][12][14]. Another interesting group of compounds that are found in C. limon fruits are limonoids - limonin and nomilin. They mainly occur in citrus fruits, including lemons, in which they are found mainly in the seeds, pulp, and peel[16]. The main components of the essential oil are monoterpenoids e.g. D-limonene (69.9%), β-pinene (11.2%), γ-terpinene (8.21%), geranial (E-citral, 2.9%), neral (Z-citral, 1.5%), linalool (1.41%). In addition to terpenoids, the essential oil also contains linear furanocoumarins (psoralens) and polymethoxylated flavones[17][18][19].
2. Influence and application
C. limon fruit juice (lemon juice) has traditionally been used as a remedy for scurvy before the discovery of vitamin C[20] [20]. This common use of C. limon, known since ancient times, has nowadays been supported by numerous scientific studies. Other uses for lemon juice, known from traditional medicine (e.g. Romanian, Trinidad, Indian) include treatment of high blood pressure, common cold, sore throats, fevers, rheumatism and irregular menstruation. Moreover, the essential oil of C. limon is a known remedy for coughs[21][22][23][24].
Currently, valuable scientific publications focus on the ever wider pharmacological actions of C. limon fruit extract, juice and essential oil. They include studies of, for example, anticancer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anti-allergic, anti-obesity and hepatoregenerative activities. Additionally researches proved the significant of role C. limon in the prevention of diabetes and treatment of its symptoms, functioning on the cardiovascular, nervous, respiratory and skeletal systems and moreover in the treatment of menstrual disorders[25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35]. 
C. limon fruit and other lemon-derived raw materials, they find application in the food industry and food processing. The lemon fruit is used mainly as a fresh fruit, but it is also processed to make juices, jams, jellies, molasses, etc.[36][37]. The essential oil from lemon, i.e. pure isolated linalol and citral, is used mainly as a flavouring and natural preservative due to its functional properties (antimicrobial, antifungal, etc.)[38][39].
C. limon fruit extracts and essential oil, as well as the active compounds isolated from these raw materials are proving the possibilities of their use in cosmetology. Lemon-derived products have a positive effect on acne-prone skin that is easily affected by sunburn or mycosis. Scientific studies have shown a significant antioxidant and anti-aging effects of C. limon fruit extracts[26][40]. According to the CosIng database (Cosmetic Ingredient Database), C. limon can be used in twenty-three forms, e.g. oils obtained from various organs, in the form of extracts, hydrolates, powdered parts of the plant, wax and juice[8]. The most common activity defined by CosIng for the raw material of this species is to keep the skin in good condition, and to be used as corrigent[8].
Moreover, there has been some biotechnological research aimed at developing effective in vitro micropropagation protocols for C. limon[41][42].
The publication “Citrus limon (lemon) phenomenon a review of the chemistry, pharmacological properties, applications in the modern pharmaceutical, food, and cosmetics industries, and biotechnological studies” can be found here: https://www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/9/1/119Related Entries
Beneficial health properties of common natural phenolic acids
Phenolic acids comprise a group of natural compounds that are present in a wide range of herbs and other species of the plant kingdom. This work focuses on the most common natural occurring phenolic acids (caffeic, carnosic, ferulic, gallic, p-coumaric, rosmarinic, vanillic) and gives a summary of their recently reported health related effects that mainly link to their antioxidant properties. A number of in vitro and in vivo animal studies has been screened by the authors who report on most important research findings on each individual phenolic acid (or natural mixtures of them) while also formulating a number of conclusions and recommendations for future work in this scientific field.
Keywords: phenolic acids; natural antioxidants; health properties
Phenolic Compounds
Phenolic compounds are phytochemicals with functions in pigmentation, astringency, protection against ultraviolet rays and antioxidant activity, being widely found in natural sources such as fruits, teas, spices, wine and honey. These compounds have received much attention in recent decades due to evidence related to positive health effects, such as anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, antithrombotic, vasodilatory and cardioprotective activity, contributing to the improvement in metabolic markers associated with diabetes, hypertension and obesity.
Keywords: microbiological stability; sensory properties; cleaner label; meat products; phenolic compounds
Natural Phenols
Phenols are widespread in nature, being the major components of several plants and essential oils. Natural phenols’ anti-microbial, anti-bacterial, anti-oxidant, pharmacological and nutritional properties are, nowadays, well established. Hence, given their peculiar biological role, numerous studies are currently ongoing to overcome their limitations, as well as to enhance their activity.
Keywords: carvacrol; thymol; eugenol; resveratrol; hispolon; hydroxytyrosol; lipidic phenols; phenolic acids; polyphenols; curcumin
Plant-Derived Substances for Oral Health Care Products
Plant extracts are the current trend in the market, but it is also essential to consider their antibacterial, antioxidant, and sensory characteristics. Plant essential oils are constituted by secondary metabolites, such as terpenes, phenols, and aldehydes with antibacterial, antioxidant, and flavoring properties. Other industries take advantage of the essential oil properties; some examples of their applications are found in the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries.
Keywords: bacterial biofilm; oral microbiota; free radicals; synergism; plant extract
Phytochemical Content and Pharmacological Potential of M. oleifera
M. oleifera contains several bioactive phytochemicals including flavonoids and isothiocyanates; polyphenols, carotenoids, alkaloids, and terpenoids; and triterpenoids, moringyne, monopalmitic, di-oleic triglyceride, campesterol, stigmasterol, β-sitosterol, avenasterol, and vitamin A. These bioactive phytochemicals are found in M. oleifera roots, fruits, and seeds. These phytochemicals have medicinal properties which have been shown to be effective antioxidant, antimicrobial, inflammatory, and anti-carcinogenic agents. More studies are required to explore the role of bioactive phytochemicals specially in kidney diseases. M. oleifera also possesses a variety of pharmacological properties, which are closely associated with the presence of its bioactive compounds. Therefore, in the following section we highlighted the pharmacological potential of M. oleifera. M. oleifera showed pharmacological potential against some plausible factors such as oxidative stress, inflammation, fibrosis, and other pathologies responsible for kidney diseases. 
Keywords: Moringa oleifera; antioxidant; anti-aging; fibrosis
Bioactive Flavonoids from Citrus Fruits
Citrus species are one of the world’s popular fruit crops, cultivated all over the world for their economic and nutritional values. Citrus, like other fruits and vegetables, are an important source of several antioxidant molecules (polyphenols, ascorbic acid, and carotenoids) that can inhibit the harmful effects of free radicals on the human body; due to their functional values and health-promoting properties, Citrus species are considered valuable fruits not only in agri-food industry, but also in pharmaceutical industry. Flavonoids are among the major constituents of polyphenols found in different parts of Citrus fruits (skin, peels, seed, pulp membrane, and juice). Flavonoids have different biological properties (antiviral, antifungal, and antibacterial activities). Several studies have also shown the health-related properties of Citrus flavonoids, especially antioxidant, anticancer, anti-inflammation, anti-aging, and cardiovascular protection activities.
Keywords: Citrus genus; bioactive molecules; flavonoids; therapeutic effects; extraction methods
Application of Encapsulated Limonene in Agri-Food Industry
Limonene or 4-isopropenyl-1-methylcyclohexene (C10H16) is a monocyclic monoterpene hydrocarbon naturally synthesized in many plants through the cyclisation of geranyl pyrophosphate by a monoterpene synthase. It constitutes one of the most abundant monocyclic monoterpenes in the plant kingdom, being found in more tan 300 essential oils and principally in Citrus spp. (30-98%). The high availability in nature together with its proved safety, make it widely exploitable in health, as flavoring agent and adjuvant in food and beverage industries, as well as in cosmetic’s for the formulation of perfumes and other personal hygiene products. In particular, this compound has been proven to possess a valuable potential as sustainable replacement to synthetic pesticides and food preservatives. To successfully use limonene in a greener agri-food industry, its preservation has become a top concern for manufacturers. In general, encapsulation conserves and protects limonene from outside aggressions, but also allows its controlled release as well as enchances its low water solubility, which can be critical for the target applications, together with other parameters, such as scalability, low cost and availability.
Keywords: limonene; agri-food industry; antimicrobial; herbicidal; antioxidant; encapsulation
Biological Activities of the Olive Tree's Polyphenolic Components
The main polyphenolic components present in the fruit and in the wax that covers the olive leaves are represented by hydroxytyrosol, luteolin, oleuropein, verbascoside, gallic acid, vanillic acid, caffeic acid, and the aldehyde derivative oleocanthal. Among all of them, the main and most studied representative is hydroxytyrosol (HT), (2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl) ethanol, 3,4-dihydroxyphenethyl alcohol, DOPET, C8H10O3, and presents a molecular mass of 154.16. It is a natural compound, whose structure corresponds to a type of polyphenol, widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom, being especially abundant in the Oleaceae family. It can be found in high concentrations in extra olive oil, fruits and leaves of Olea europaea, and in other products such as fruits, vegetables, and tea. HT in oil is found in free form, as an acetate, or as part of more complex compounds such as oleuropein (a secoiridoide glycoside esterified with a phenylpropanoid alcohol, the major phenolic component of green olive pulp), the flavonoid luteolin (a 5,7-dihidroxi-4-cromenona with hydroxytyrosol), and verbascoside (a phenylethanoid with hydroxytyrosol and a phenylpropanoid sugar ester with caffeic acid).
Keywords: animal nutrition; diet; feeding; hydroxytyrosol; maslinic acid
Citrus Flavonoids Neohesperidin, Hesperidin and Its Aglycone, Hesperetin
Neohesperidin, hesperidin and hesperetin are citrus flavonoids from the flavanones subclass that have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant potential. Neohesperidin, in the form of neohesperidin dihydrochalcone (NHDC), also has dietary properties as a sweetener. 
Keywords: neohesperidin; hesperidin; hesperetin
Polyphenols from Red and White Grape Pomace
Grape pomace (GP) represents a very reliable source of polyphenols because it could be found globally as a remnant of the wine industry. During the winemaking process, two types of GP are generated: red GP and white GP, according to the produced wine, red or white. Grape pomace represents a viable source of polyphenols, mainly flavanols, procyanidins anthocyanins, and resveratrol which possess antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. Multiple differences were observed between red and white GP in terms of their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity in both in vitro and in vivo studies. Although most studies are focused on the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effect of red grape pomace, there are still many variables that need to be taken into consideration, as well as extensive study of the white GP. It was observed that in both in vitro and in vivo studies, the GP polyphenols have a direct antioxidant activity by acting as a free radical scavenger or donating a hydrogen atom. It also possesses an indirect antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity by reducing mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, malondialdehyde (MDA), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1-beta (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF- κβ), and inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit beta (Iκκβ) levels or nitrate oxide-4 (NOX4) expression and by increasing the levels of antioxidants enzymes like superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) glutathione reductase (GRx) and glutathione peroxidase(GPx). Besides these activities, many beneficial effects in ischemic heart diseases were also observed, such as the maintenance of the ventricular function as close as possible to normal, and the prevention of infarcted area extension.
Keywords: antioxidant; anti-inflammatory; grape pomace; polyphenols; ischemic heart diseases