Biological attributes of lemon: A review

Abstract
The citrus fruits are originate to be frequently in cultivation throughout the tropics and are extremely nutritious and medicinal in nature. According to Ayurveda,
different parts of Lemon tree possess various medicinal properties. Many properties such as anti-infl ammatory, anti-viral, anti-oxidant and anti-diabetic are shown by
lemon. In the present review important effects such as anti-fungal, anti-oxidant, anti-infl ammatory, anticancer, antibacterial, anti-ulcer and desorption also have been
studied In lemon, very important natural compounds containing ascorbic acid, minerals, citric acid, essential oils and fl avonoids are present in high quantity9
. lemon
shows anticancer and antibacterial activity due to the presence of alkaloid constituent in different parts of lemon leaves, stem, root and fl ower. Millennium development
goals (MDGs) have one of the fundamental goal which is the quest to combat the incidence of diseases such as kidney stone, respiratory disorder, cancer blood sugar
balance and cardiovascular diseases. The potential sources of drugs are secondary metabolites due to their therapeutic importance. These secondary metabolites are
rich in medicinal plants.
Introduction
In advanced and undeveloped countries, due to no side
effect and natural origin, usually herbal medicines are used.
From medicinal plants, many customary medicines are derived
which can be used. There are 21,000 plants which are used for
medicinal purposes all around the world are listed by World
Health Organization (WHO). According to the World Health
Organization (WHO), the best sources to acquire the diversity
of drugs are medicinal plants. The largest manufacturer of
medicinal plants is India which is also called botanical garden
of world [1]. In family Rutaceae, the genus Citrus is greatest
operational herb in traditional medicines. In tropical and
subtropical areas of Asia, the native genus is citrus. The main
winter fruits are the citrus fruits which are used up in the diet of
Mediterranean. The citrus fruits are originate to be frequently in
cultivation throughout the tropics and are extremely nutritious
and medicinal in nature. In Mediterranean region, there are
eight taxa have been traditionally cultivated belonging to the
genus Citrus.
History
(Rutaceae). For citrus lemon, the most common name
is lemon and it is an edible fruit. After orange, lemon is the
third most signifi cant specie of citrus fruits which is cultivated
more than 4.4 million ton in each year. At present, the biggest
producer of lemons in the world is Argentina with 1.2 million
tones. In lemon, very important natural compounds containing
ascorbic acid, minerals, citric acid, essential oils and fl avonoids
are present in high quantity [2]. Lemon shows anticancer
and antibacterial activity due to the presence of alkaloid
constituent in different parts of lemon leaves, stem, root and
fl ower [3]. There are different varieties of lemon include: Avon,
Berna, Baboon, Bearss, Cameron [4]. Peels of lemon consist of
various phytochemicals, such as glycosides, volatile oils,  and
-sitosterol. There are various signifi cant activities found in
lemon like polyethoxylated, ascorbic acid, fl avones, phenolic
compounds which are exceptional in other plants.
In 200A.D, lemon plant was fi rst introduced in southern
Italy and then taken to Iraq and Egypt in 700 A.D. Lemon was
distributed in the Mediterranean Region by 1000-1150A.D and
then cultivated in China approximately 760-1297 A.D. Lemon
was brought into Spanish and then to Island in Hispaniola in
1493. Lemon was launched in California in 1751 -1786 [5].
Graphical distribution
It is native in north Indian but cultivated in Turkey,
Mexico, United States, Argentina, Iran, Brazil, Italy, Spain
and People Republic of China. The fruit of lemon can be used
for non-culinary and culinary purposes all over the world.
Predominantly, lemon is used for its juice from side to side the
pulp and taste is as well used mostly in baking and cooking [6].
Toxicological Classifi cation:
Kingdom: Plantae
Subkingdom: Angiosperms
Phylum: Eudicots
Class: Rosids
Order: Sapindales
Family: Rutaceae
Genus: Citrus
Species: C. Limon
Botanical description
Citrus trees produce fruits of different shapes and sizes
(from round to oblong), these trees are evergreen and full of
fl avor, fragrance, and juice [7]. The color of leaves of lemon is 
dark green; these are 6.5 to 10mm and are arranged on stem
in alternate manners. There are fi ve petals in lemon with
white fragrant color. The pulp of lemon is highly acidic and its
fl ower is bisexual and male. ‘Pink Lemonade’ is lemon cultivar
from which the fl ower of lemon originates. The fruit of this
cultivaris striped and leaves are variegated. Commonly lemons
are oval in shape with smooth and spongy surface [8]. Lemons
are varied in their shapes and sizes, some are like grape fruits
and some are little bigger in size. Lemons are mostly greenish
yellow in color after gaining its full size it shows bright yellow
color instead of greenish yellow. The small seeds are found
with-in the fruit called fl oopies [9] Figures 1-3. 