A Critical Review on Nutritional and Medicinal Importance of Lemon

Introduction
Citrus Lemon (L.) commonly known as limo or nibu in Pakistan
and areas of sub-continent. It belongs to the family of Evergreen
tree species named as Rutaceae that is commonly found in South
Asia and primarily in North East India. Lemon is known for its
various distinctive features and importance in every aspect of life
whether it is related to food, medicine, or nutrition. But the most
important point is this that it has great medicinal and nutritional
importance [1,2]. All parts of it are utilizable and have their own
importance, like its juice is helpful in many ways including reducing fever, which is too common among us [2], blood pressure, that
is considered as main step toward chronic disorders [1] etc., its
leaf that was treated as waste is also utilizable for extracting oil to
serve as medicinal and nutritional property as well as have great
importance as natural preserving agent [3]. Not only lemon is used
individually but it is proved to be more beneficial when added with
honey for sore throat and water for reducing weight. To prove it
beneficial in many ways scientists and researchers have done
many experiments on its every part not only on mice [4] and rats
[5] but also practically on humans [1,6]. It does not have any side
effect according to the modern literature as well as traditional one
[2] that’s why people use it without any hesitation and danger of
getting disease from its side effects. Many disorders are treated by
using it at home, due to its special properties and also it is inexpensive, easy and quick way to cure many aches and even diseases [1].
Materials and Methods
A lemon has enriched with highly and some rare nutrients providing their qualities and richness to the consumer’s body. Lemon
has sour and somehow bitter taste due to which it is not commonly
taken as such, instead by mixing its juice with water or honey, and
mixing its flavor or itself in different dishes and salads people are
replenishing themselves with the sourness of lemon.
Results and Discussion
Nutritional contents
A lemon without its peel is capable of giving 17 calories whereas
with peel it contains 22 calories. Lemon juice contains 3 calories
per 1 table spoon and according to “World’s Healthiest Foods a
quarter cup of it contains 31 percent of recommended vitamin C
intake and 3 percent of Folate and 2 percent of potassium which
make up total 13 calories”. When mixed with water, which is proved
to be a perfect day start [2] lemon juice can provide 1 calorie that
is very helpful in reducing weight by reducing calorie intake in human body, it means water reduces the sourness and calories of lemon juice and can reduce the excessive fat layer of body [7]. The most
important water soluble vitamin i.e. vitamin C that has much importance in our daily routine is present in it, and according to “The
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) national nutrient
database says that one raw lemon, without peel, weighing about 58
grams (g), contains 44.5 mg of vitamin C”.
Lemon is also a source of many minerals though in a small
amount but they do show their importance in many ways. For example, it contains 116 mg of potassium that works synergistically
with sodium in our body to regulate the water balance in our body,
15 mg of calcium that is responsible of supporting bones [2]. And
it also have 0.5 mg of iron, 7mg of magnesium, 13 mg of phosphorus, 0.05 mg of zinc, 9 mcg of folate and 1 mg of vitamin A that are
served to be micro minerals and are engaged in many function and
supporting functions of our body. In addition, lemons contain small
amounts of thiamin, riboflavin, vitamin B-6, pantothenic acid, copper, and manganese.
An antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent named as Naringenin is also present in it that fight against inflammation [6]. Flavonoids such as erioctitrin and heperidin in high amounts whereas
diosmin in comparatively small amount [1]. Moreover it contain
citral, limonene, terpinol, geranyl acetate, and linalyl and certain
alkaloids that fight against cancer and bacteria [2]. Not only its fruit
but its wastes like leaf is also enriched with something very beneficial. It has been researched lately that it contains oil in it that is
very beneficial in many ways due to presence
Medicinal importance
Lately people are seemed more concerned about changing their
lifestyle by replacing medicine with natural food and herbs and
their derivatives. It is far more considerable to use natural food
items as medicine and using them or their nutrient contents in
making pharmacological medicines. Lemon along with it several
magical components in it is not only used as traditional medicine
but also act as raw material for many medicines. Each of its component has its own signature cure which will be very significant, of
course! Traditionally, it is used to cure many diseases at home for
example obesity, UTI, gall bladder, stones, and kidney stones, acne
scars and pimples etc. [2]. Starting from common childhood and
adolescent obesity to major diseases like Cancer and UTI, lemon is
doing wonders.
Obesity
Obesity is a medical condition in which excess body fat has accumulated to the extent that it may have an adverse effect on health.
Mixing lemon with glass of warm water can break adipose tissue
and body fat that results in reversing the condition, not only this,
it can control food carvings due to pectin present in it [7]. Lemon
peel extracts are also used as remedy for childhood and adolescent
obesity [6]. Citrus present in lemon aids for decreasing lipid and
lipoprotein layer of the body [2,6].