Lemon (Citrus limon) Juice Has Antibacterial Potential against Diarrhea-Causing Pathogen

Lemon (Citrus limon) Juice Has Antibacterial Potential against
Diarrhea-Causing Pathogen
1. Introduction
Diarrhea is a liquid defecation more than three times a day, with or without blood and or mucus in the
stool. Diarrhea is a disease that can cause pain and death. Diarrhea may attack almost any age and
cosmopolitan, but severe diarrheal diseases with high mortality rates are especially found in infants
and children [1]. Diarrhea often attacks infants and children. If it is not treated, it may lead to
dehydration, which may finally lead to death. The high incidence of infant and childhood death due to
diarrhea requires more specific diagnosis, so direct antigen examinations from feces have a high
sensitivity ranging from 70%-90% [2].
In Indonesia, diarrheal disease is still one of the main public health problems. As much as 55% of
diarrhea cases occur during childhood. The incidence of diarrhea in children under five age is 1.0-1.5
times every year [2]. Many factors, such as bacteria, viruses, malabsorption, allergies, and poisoning,
can directly or indirectly trigger diarrhea through intestinal inflammation or, in children, transmission
through food and drinks contaminated by those causative pathogens [3][4].
The second most common cause of diarrhea after rotavirus is the infection due to Escherichia coli
bacteria. Escherichia coli is a commensal bacterium, intestinal and extraintestinal pathogens that can
cause urinary tract infections, meningitis, and septicemia [5]. The major cause of infectious diarrhea in
the developing world is the enterotoxin Escherichia coli [6]. These organisms are estimated to be
responsible for millions and hundreds of thousands of deaths, particularly of young children. Despite
significant declines in death from acute diarrhea [7], enteric infections caused by enterotoxin
Eschericia coli (ETEC) and other pathogens remain inextricably associated with malnutrition, stunted
growth and impaired intellectual development [8]. Inappropriate use of antibiotics can cause resistant
bacteria to antibiotics that have been given [9].
The use of natural ingredients in herbal medicines is considered safer than the use of modern
chemical drugs, because the side effects of herbal medicines are relatively small if used appropriately
[10], [11]. One of the herbal plants often used as medicine is the lemon fruit. Lemon fruit is an herbal
plant that has the main content of alkaloid compounds which have the function as anticancer,
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral and antidiabetic. Alkaloid compounds that responsible for
antibacterial is saponin [12]. Lemon (Citrus limon) juice contains many bioactive compounds such as
flavonoids, carotenoids, limonoid, tannin, and terpenoids. The bioactive compounds contained in
lemon (Citrus limon) each have an antibacterial [13]. Lemon (Citrus aurantifolia) juice besides being
used as an antibacterial, it is also useful as an antioxidant. The main content of lemon (Citrus limon)
juice is vitamin C and citric acid. The content of vitamin C and citric acid makes the degree of acidity
(pH) the lemon (Citrus limon) juice become acidic [10][14].
This study was aimed to determine the potential of lemon (Citrus limon) juice in inhibiting the
growth of bacteria causes diarrhea and analyzing the optimum dose.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Sample Collection
Lemon (Citrus limon) was collected from the traditional market in Larangan Market Sidoarjo, East
Java, Indonesia. The sample was placed in a plastic bag and was transported immediately to
Bacteriology Laboratory Faculty of Health Science, University of Maarif Hasyim Latif, Sidoarjo, Jawa
Timur, Indonesia. The sample was processed immediately in the laboratory.
2.2.Instruments, Reagents, and Medium
The instruments used in this study were a test tube, rack tube, scale pipette, spatula, drop pipette, petri
dish, ose, autoclave, bunsen, beaker glass, erlenmeyer, Mc. Farland 0.5 standard, steel pickers, filters,
tweezers, measuring cups, beaker glass, micropipette, yellow tip, incubator, stirrer, hot plate, sterile
swabs, digital scales, orange squeezer, aluminum foil and sterile gauze.
The material used in this study was lemon (Citrus limon) juice, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli,
Mac Conkey Agar medium (Merck, Germany), Eosin Methylen Blue medium (Merck, Germany),
Nutrient Broth medium (Merck, Germany), Kliger Iron Agar medium (Merck, Germany), biochemical
reactions medium (Merck, Germany), sterile physiological zouth, sterile aquadest, MHA medium,
ciprofloxacin 500 mg and alcohol 70%. 
2.3.Purification of ETEC Suspension
The stock of test bacteria, in this case, was Enterotoxin Escherichia coli (ETEC) planted in NB
medium and then incubated at 370
 C for 24 hours. The bacteria that grew in NB medium were planted
on MCA and EMB medium and then incubated at 370
C for 24 hours [15]. Colonies grown on EMB
medium were planted in KIA medium and then incubated at 370
C for 24 hours. Furthermore, it was
planted in the biochemical reaction medium and incubated in 370
C for 24 hours. The colonies were
taken and planted on the NAS medium as the stock of bacteria
2.4.Preparation of ETEC Suspension
The bacterial colonies that have been grown for 24 hours on NAS medium were inserted into 10 mL of
sterile physiological zouth and then homogenized. The turbidity level of ETEC suspension was
equalized using McFarland 0.5 standard which had a density equivalent to 1.5 x 108
 CFU/ml [16].
2.5.Preparation of lemon juice dose
Lemon (Citrus limon), that has been washed with sterile aquadest, was cut transversely using a sterile
knife and then squeezed using an orange squeezer. The juice was filtered using a sterile gauze, as
much as 100 mL was taken and diluted with 100 mL of sterile aquadest to obtain a concentration of
1000 mg/ml dilution. From the dose of 1000 mg/ml, several dilutions were made to obtain doses of
100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, and 900 mg/ml.
2.6.Preparation control
Prepared 1 mL of sterile aquadest and taken as much as 100 µl for inclusion in the well for negative
control [17]. Prepared of ciprofloxacin 500 mg was dissolved in 100 mL of sterile aquadest and then
100 µl was taken to be put into the well for positive control [17].
4. Conclusion
Lemon (Citrus limon) juice can inhibit the growth of pathogens that cause diarrhea, in this case, the
Enterotoxin Escherichia coli (ETEC) bacteria. This results showed that the optimum dose of lemon
(Citrus limon) juice in inhibiting diarrhea-causing pathogenic bacteria was 900 mg/ml.