Scientific Name: Citrus Limon Linn.

Citurs limon may have had its origin in Italy. However, it is found in several countries lying in the tropics. Specialists have developed a number of strains by using genetically methods, grafting etc., resulting in the reduction in the size of the tree from 5 meters to as  short as1.5 meters. They have also been successful in increasing the size of the fruit and reducing the number of seeds. The leaves are oblong with a narrow base and barely winged. The flowers are white, solitary or in pairs, in the leaf axils. The fruit is ovoid and yellow when mature and the juice is rich in Vitamin C. the lemon tree is considered the champion of medicinal plants.
MEDICINAL USE:
To lower the body heat.
To give tone and vitality to the body.
For colds, coughs, throat diseases, headache, stomach ache, indigestion and rheumatism.
For corns, warts, burns, dandruff and as a disinfectant.
HOW TO USE:
The first 3 points under Medicinal use can be taken care of by simply drinking 4 to 8 glasses of lemon juice per day.
Corns, warts, burns, dandruff can be taken care of by applying the juice externally on the site of the ailment.
An excellent treatment for numerous diseases is a lemon cure or  lemon fasting. The first day, the juice of 1 lemon is taken, pure or in water. The second day 2, the third day 3 and son on until the tenth day. The eleventh day 9, the twelfth day 8 and so forth until reaching 1 lemon a day. In 20days a lemon cure is completed. The cure can be made also by increasing 2lemons each day until completing 20, then decrease until 2. The quantity and the duration of the treatment depends upon the nature and kind of disease. In case of influenza, colds, etc., when the diseases is not a chronic one, 5 to 10 lemons can be used for 3 or 4 days to hasten the cure. In a lemon cure, some skin rashes may appear. This means that the lemon juice is having a powerful effect, and the blood is being cleansed from foreign substances. Lemon can only do good. It does not harm the physical condition of anyone.
