Citrus lemon essential oil: chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities with its preservative effect against Listeria monocytogenes inoculated in minced beef meat

Methods
In this study, we assessed chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of C. limon essential oil (ClEO) with its preservative effect against Listeria monocytogenes inoculated in minced beef meat. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC-MS) was used to identify the major components of the obtained ClEO. The antioxidant activities of this ClEO were determined according to the carotene bleaching assay, as well as by 2.2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging activity. For antimicrobial activity, agar well diffusion method was used and the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) as well as the minimum fungicidal concentrations (MFCs) were determined. The in situ effect of the ClEO was evaluated through physicochemical parameters (pH and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), as well as against L. monocytogenes in minced beef meat model.
Background
Citrus are the most important crops in the world in terms of production according to the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), with 240,780 million metric tons produced in 2013 [1]. Citrus plants are grown in many countries all over the world and among the major African citrus-producing countries is Tunisia. Thus, Citrus would be considered as one of the most economically important crops in Tunisia. The genus Citrus belongs to the Rutaceae family that comprises of about 140 genera and 1300 species and, for instance, Citrus limon (Lemon) is among important species of genus Citrus [2]. Essential oils were composed of many valuable natural products that may be described as mixtures of hydrocarbons, oxygenated compounds and nonvolatile residues. They include terpenes, sesquiterpenes, aldehydes, alcohols, esters and sterols [3]. Citrus plants constitute one of the main sources of essential oil, which are extensively studied for their potential uses in the food industry [4].
One of the most important psychrotrophic food pathogens related to anaerobically packed cooked meat products and shelf-life failures of conserved foods is Listeria monocytogenes. This organism is the causal agent of listeriosis, a disease that can be serious and is often fatal in susceptible individuals, caused by eating contaminated food [7]. Thus, to prevent contamination during the production, sale and distribution and to extend the shelf life time of raw and/or processed foods, synthetic additives should be used. However, there is a strong debate about the safety aspects of these chemical preservatives since they are considered responsible for many carcinogenic and teratogenic attributes as well as residual toxicity [8]. Thus, a growing attention is being paid to plants and herbs naturally derived compounds as a new alternative to prevent the proliferation of microorganism and protect food from oxidation. Generally, little information exists on the in vivo antimicrobial efficacy of plant essential oils against food-borne pathogens in meat. To the best of our knowledge, the antimicrobial activity of Citrus limon essential oil (ClEO) against a wide range of food-associated microorganisms (bacteria, moulds, and yeasts) has not been studied. The purposes of the present work were (i) to evaluate the chemical composition of Tunisian lemon EO (ClEO) by GC-MS, (ii) to study in vitro the antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of ClEO, (iii) to assess the effect of ClEO on physicochemical of raw minced beef meat stored at 4 °C, and (iv) to determine the efficacy of ClEO in inhibiting L. monocytogenes growth in raw minced beef meat during refrigerated storage.
