Lemon   Uses, Side Effects, and More

Overview
Lemon (Citrus limon) is a type of citrus fruit. It contains high levels of citric acid. The fruit, juice, and peel are used to make medicine.
Lemon contains antioxidants called bioflavonoids. These bioflavonoids might be responsible for the health benefits of lemon.
People use lemon for hay fever, high blood pressure, obesity, morning sickness, and many other conditions, but there is no good scientific evidence to support these uses.
Don't confuse lemon with other citrus fruits, such as grapefruit, lime, and sweet orange.
When taken by mouth: Lemon is commonly consumed in foods. There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe to use in greater amounts or what the side effects might be.
When applied to the skin: There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe. It might cause side effects such as an increased risk of sunburn, especially in light skinned people.
When applied into the nose: There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe or what the side effects might be.
When inhaled: Lemon essential oil is possibly safe when used as aromathWhen taken by mouth: Lemon is commonly consumed in foods. There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe to use in greater amounts or what the side effects might be.
When applied to the skin: There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe. It might cause side effects such as an increased risk of sunburn, especially in light skinned people.
When applied into the nose: There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe or what the side effects might be.
When inhaled: Lemon essential oil is possibly safe when used as aromatherapy.
Pregnancy and breast feeding: Lemon is commonly consumed in foods. There isn't enough reliable information to know if lemon is safe to use in greater amounts. Stay on the safe side and stick to food amounts.
Lemon is commonly consumed in foods. As medicine, there isn't enough reliable information to know what an appropriate dose of lemon might be. Keep in mind that natural products are not always necessarily safe and dosages can be important. Be sure to follow relevant directions on product labels and consult a healthcare professional before using.

