Syzygium Jambos Description

LOCAL NAMES
English (plum rose,rose apple,malabar plum); Filipino (yambo); French
(jamboisie,jambo,pomme rose,pommier rose,pommier rose jambosier);
Indonesian (jambu kraton,jambu air mawar); Khmer (châm'puu); Lao (Sino-
Tibetan) (chièng,kièng); Portuguese (jambo amarelo,jambeiro); Spanish
(manzana rosa,manzanita de rosa,poma rosa,pomo); Thai (jambu
kelampok,yamu-panawa); Vietnamese (bô dào,roi,ly)
BOTANIC DESCRIPTION
Syzygium jambos may be merely a shrub but is generally a tree reaching
7.5-12 m in height, and has a dense crown of slender, wide-spreading
branches, often the overall width exceeding the height.
The evergreen leaves are opposite, lanceolate or narrow-elliptic, tapering
to a point,
10-22 cm long, and 2.5-6.25 cm wide; somewhat leathery, glossy, dark-
green when mature, rosy when young.
The flowers are creamy-white or greenish-white, 5-10 cm wide, consisting
mostly of about 300 conspicuous stamens to 4 cm long, a 4-lobed calyx,
and 4 greenish-white, concave petals. There are usually 4 or 5 flowers
together in terminal clusters.
Capped with the prominent, green, tough calyx, the fruit is nearly round,
oval, or slightly pear-shaped, 4-5 cm long, with smooth, thin, pale-yellow
or whitish skin, sometimes pink-blushed, covering a crisp, mealy, dry to
juicy layer of yellowish flesh, sweet and resembling the scent of a rose in
flavour.
In the hollow center of the fruit, are 1-4 brown, rough-coated, medium-
hard, more or less rounded seeds, 1-1.6 cm thick, which loosen from the
inner wall and rattle when the fruit is shaken. Fragments of the seed coat
may be found in the cavity.
The generic name is derived from the Greek syzygios (paired), on account
of the leaves and twigs that in several species grow at the same point.
BIOLOGY
Fruiting can be expected within 4 years. In Jamaica and Puerto Rico, the
rose apple trees bloom and fruit sporadically nearly all the year round,
though somewhat less in summer than at other times. The main season in
the Bahamas and in Florida is May through July. The fruiting period varies
in different parts of India. In South India, blooming usually occurs in
January, with fruit ripening in March and April, whereas in the Circars,
ripening takes place in April and May. In the central part of the country,
flowering occurs in February, March and April and the fruits ripen from
June through July. Then again, it is reported that there are varieties that
produce fruit in February and March.
Flowers and fruit (Trade winds fruit)
Page 1 of 5Agroforestry Database 4.0 (Orwa et al.2009)
Syzygium jambos
Myrtaceae
Alston
ECOLOGY
The rose apple flourishes in the tropical and near-tropical climates only. In Jamaica, it is naturalized from near sea-level
up to an altitude of 915 m; in Hawaii, from sea-level to 1 200 m. In India, it ranges up to 350 m, in Ecuador, to 2 300 m.
At the upper limits, as in California, the tree grows vigorously but will not bear fruit. In India, it does best on the banks of
canals and streams and yet tolerates semi-arid conditions. Prolonged dry spells, however, are detrimental.
BIOPHYSICAL LIMITS
Altitude: 0-2300 m
Mean annual temperature: 18-27 deg. C
Mean annual rainfall: 1 100- 2 100 mm
Soil type: A deep, loamy soil is considered ideal for the rose apple but it is not too exacting, for it flourishes also on sand
and limestone with very little organic matter.
DOCUMENTED SPECIES DISTRIBUTION
The map above shows countries where the species has been planted. It does neither
suggest that the species can be planted in every ecological zone within that country,
nor that the species can not be planted in other countries than those depicted. Since
some tree species are invasive, you need to follow biosafety procedures that apply to
your planting site.
Exotic range
Native range
Guatemala, Honduras, Malaysia, Panama, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands (US)
Australia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Reunion, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Province of China, Thailand, Tonga, United
States of America, Zanzibar
Native:
Exotic:
Page 2 of 5Agroforestry Database 4.0 (Orwa et al.2009)
Syzygium jambos
Myrtaceae
Alston
The map above shows countries where the species has been planted. It does neither
suggest that the species can be planted in every ecological zone within that country,
nor that the species can not be planted in other countries than those depicted. Since
some tree species are invasive, you need to follow biosafety procedures that apply to
your planting site.
PRODUCTS
Food: Around the tropical world, rose apples are mostly eaten out-of-hand by children. They are seldom marketed. In
the home, they are sometimes stewed with some sugar and served as dessert. Culinary experimenters have devised
other modes of using the cup-like halved fruits. One stuffs them with a rice-and-meat mixture, covers them with a
tomato sauce seasoned with minced garlic, and bakes them for about 20 minutes. Possible variations are limitless. The
fruit is made into jam or jelly with lemon juice added, or more frequently preserved in combination with other fruits of
more pronounced flavour. It is also made into a syrup for use as a sauce or to flavour cold drinks. In Jamaica, the
halved or sliced fruits are candied by stewing them in very heavy sugar syrup with cinnamon.
Apiculture: The flowers are a rich source of nectar for honeybees and the honey is a good amber colour. Much comes
from the San Cristobal River Valley in Cuba.
Fuel: The tree grows back rapidly after cutting to a stump and consequently yields a continuous supply of small wood
for fuel. Rose apple wood makes very good charcoal.
Fibre: The flexible branches have been employed in Puerto Rico to make hoops for large sugar casks, and also are
valued for weaving large baskets.
Timber: The sapwood is white. The heartwood is dark-red or brown, fibrous, close-grained, medium-heavy to heavy,
strong; and has been used to make furniture, spokes for wheels, arms for easy chairs, knees for all kinds of boats,
beams for construction, frames for musical instruments (violins, guitars, etc.), and packing cases. It is also popular for
general turnery. It is not durable in the ground and is prone to attack by dry wood termites.
Tannin or dyestuff: The bark has been used for tanning and yields a brown dye.
Essential oil: A yellow essential oil, distilled from the leaves, contains, among other properties, 26.84% dl-a-pinene and
23.84% l-limonene, and can be resorted to as a source of these elements for use in the perfume industry.
Poison: The seeds are said to be poisonous. An unknown amount of hydrocyanic acid has been reported in the roots,
stems and leaves. An alkaloid, jambosine, has been found in the bark of the tree and of the roots, and the roots are
considered poisonous.
Medicine: In India, the fruit is regarded as a tonic for the brain and liver. An infusion of the fruit acts as a diuretic. A
sweetened preparation of the flowers is believed to reduce fever. The seeds are employed against diarrhoea, dysentery
and catarrh. In Nicaragua, it has been claimed that an infusion of roasted, powdered seeds is beneficial to diabetics.
They say in Colombia that the seeds have an anesthetic property. The leaf decoction is applied to sore eyes, also
serves as a diuretic and expectorant and treatment for rheumatism. The juice of macerated leaves is taken as a
febrifuge. Powdered leaves have been rubbed on the bodies of smallpox patients for the cooling effect. The bark
contains 7-12.4% tannin. It is emetic and cathartic. The decoction is administered to relieve asthma, bronchitis and
hoarseness. Cuban people believe that the root is an effective remedy for epilepsy.
SERVICES
Ornamental: In Israel for instance, rose apple is of interest as an ornamental rather than as a fruit and in California, it is
planted as far north as San Francisco for its ornamental foliage and flowers. The showy cream-coloured flowers, dark-
green foliage, and moderate size contribute to its popularity.
Boundary or barrier or support: In Guatemala, the tree may be planted as a living fence post or in hedgerows around
coffee plantations. For this purpose, it is drastically pruned to promote dense growth