Phenolic compounds from Syzygium jambos (Myrtaceae) exhibit distinct antioxidant and hepatoprotective activities in vivo

1. Introduction
Liver plays a central role in filtering and clearing blood received
from digestive tract prior to pass it to other body tissues and organs.
Moreover, it is involved in detoxifying the body from xenobiotics,
toxins, and in mediating drug transformations and metabolism.
However, despite its physiological role, the liver is highly susceptible to
damage from different toxins, viruses and reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species (ROS and RNS, respectively) (De Abajo, Montero, Madurga, &
Garcia Rodriguez, 2004; Hoek & Pastorino, 2002). Such damage is often
associated with metabolic and synthetic dysfunctions which can lead to
fatal complications (Orhan, Orhan, Ergun, & Ergun, 2007).
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are produced as an inevitable
outcome of cell metabolism and as a result of environmental stress as
well. Even if ROS and RNS show some beneficial effects, such as cyto-
toxicity against bacteria and other pathogens, a high concentration of
these reactive free radical species can cause oxidative damage of cel-
lular macromolecules, such as lipids, proteins, and DNA, thus, in turn,
leading to DNA mutations and disrupting cellular functionality that
enhances the pathogenesis of various disorders affecting liver and other
organs and systems (Valko et al., 2007).
Keeping the levels of ROS under control is achieved through some
enzymatic cellular mechanisms, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD)
which catalyses the transformation of super oxide radicals into either
molecular oxygen, or the less reactive hydrogen peroxide which can be
then destroyed by catalase (CAT) (Fridovich, 1993). The endogenous
glutathione (GSH) is crucial for cells as it is able to scavenge many free
radicals, peroxides, lipid peroxides, electrophiles, physiological meta-
bolites, and xenobiotics forming soluble mercapturates (Rees & Sinha,
1960).
In case of enhanced ROS levels, the ingestion of dietary anti-
oxidants. i.e. carotenoids, vitamin C, anthocyanins, vitamin E and
several other plant secondary metabolites, such as polyphenolics, can
support the organism in the defence pathway (Sies & Stahl, 1995). In
this context, hepatic diseases, often associated with increased in-
tracellular ROS levels are of special concern, as they can evolve into
fatal complications. Some plants and their secondary metabolites can
provide safe, efficacious, antioxidant multi-mechanistic agents that may
be useful as hepatoprotective drugs (Abbas & Wink, 2014; Youssef
et al., 2016).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2017.12.055
Received 2 June 2017; Received in revised form 20 December 2017; Accepted 21 December 2017
⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: sobeh@uni-heidelberg.de (M. Sobeh), wink@uni-heidelberg.de (M. Wink).
Journal of Functional Foods 41 (2018) 223–231
1756-4646/ © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
brought to you by COREView metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Archivio della ricerca - Università degli studi di Napoli Federico II
The genus Syzygium comprises 1200 species occurring in Africa and
the Pacific region. Syzygium is one of 131 genera belonging to the
complex, well-studied myrtle family, Myrtaceae (with 5500 species).
This genus, along with the other strongly aromatic genera (i.e. Myrtus,
Eugenia, Melaleuca, and Eucalyptus), are rich in essential oils, flavonoids,
flavonols, anthocyanins, ellagitannins, and phenolic acids (Haron,
Moore, & Harborne, 1992; Kuo, Yang, & Lin, 2004; Nawwar et al., 2016;
Sobeh et al., 2016).
The phytochemistry and pharmacology of several members of this
genus (including S. cumini, S. aqueum, S. samarangense, S. aromaticum,
and S. jambolanum) have been extensively investigated. In traditional
medicine, some of them have been used to treat several disorders, such
as hemorrhage, dysentery and gastrointestinal disorders, as well as
diabetes and inflammation as these extracts possess antifungal, anti-
microbial, antihypertensive, analgesic and antiviral (against herpes
virus) properties (Kuiate, Mouokeu, Wabo, & Tane, 2007; Kuo et al.,
2004; Raga et al., 2011; Sharma, Kishore, Hussein, & Lall, 2013).
The rose apple, Syzygium jambos (syn. Eugenia jambos L.), is a large
shrub or small to medium in size tree, known to grow originally in
Southeast Asia, but now widely distributed in the tropics. The plant has
been traditionally used for its antipyretic and anti-inflammatory prop-
erties and to treat hemorrhages, syphilis, leprosy, wounds, ulcers, and
lung diseases. In Indo-China, all plant parts are employed to treat di-
gestive tract and tooth disorders. The leaves decoction is used as anti-
rheumatic, diuretic, and to relieve sore eye conditions (Kuiate et al.,
2007; Nawwar et al., 2016).
Generally, leaf extracts of S. jambos and isolated flavonoid glyco-
sides have shown substantial anti-inflammatory activity (Slowing,
Carretero, & Villar, 1994). A study from Venezuela has reported pro-
mising anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities for the leaf extract
when compared to the positive controls diclofenac and morphine, re-
spectively (Avila-Peña, Peña, Quintero, & Suárez-Roca, 2007). In an-
other study, leaf extracts from plants grown in Pretoria, South Africa,
have been subjected to bioassay guided fractionation resulting in the
isolation of ursolic acid and the anacardic acid analogue, squalene
(Sharma et al., 2013). Kuiate et al. (2007) have reported anti-
dermatophytic activity of the ethyl acetate extract of the stem bark and
its isolated compounds against three dermatophyte species.
The phytochemical investigation of the plant parts revealed several
secondary metabolites. For instance, a recent study from plants culti-
vated in Egypt has reported three unknown compounds from the aqu-
eous ethanol extract of the whole plant along with 8 known compounds
including myricetin 3-O-xylosyl-(1 → 2) rhamnoside, quercetin 3-O-
xylosyl-(1 → 2) rhamnoside and ellagic acid (Nawwar et al., 2016). In
Taiwan, two hydrolyzable tannins, 1-O-galloylcastalagin and casuar-
inin, were isolated from the leaf extract; they turned out to exhibit
potent anticancer activity in vitro (Yang, Lee, & Yen, 2000).
From plants coming from Sri Lanka, the phytochemical profiling of
the methylene chloride extract of the leaves revealed three dihy-
drochalcones, myrigalone G, myrigalone B, and phloretin 4 -O-methyl
with appreciable radical scavenging properties (Jayasinghe, Ratnayake,
Medawala, & Fujimoto, 2007). The phytochemical investigation of the
fruits from Chinese plants revealed seven new phloroglucinol deriva-
tives (jambone A, B to G) along with four known triterpenoids and two
known flavones, some of which showed promising cytotoxic activities
against melanoma cells (Li et al., 2015).
In the current study, the polyphenols of S. jambos were investigated
using HPLC-PDA-MS/MS. The potential antioxidant activity of a me-
thanol extract was evaluated both in vitro using DPPH and FRAP assays,
on hepatocytes, and in vivo using the well-established nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans model. Moreover, the potential hepatoprotective
activity of a methanol extract was demonstrated in stressed hepatic
cells and in an acute CCl 4 -induced hepatic injury rat model.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals
Carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, St
Louis, MO, USA. All colorimetric kits for biochemical parameters were
obtained from Biodiagnostic Co, Cairo, Egypt. All other chemicals and
kits were of the highest analytical grade.
2.2. Plant material and extraction
During the spring season (April-May 2015), fresh mature plant
leaves were collected from trees grown in a private garden in El Obour
city (Egypt). A voucher specimen is kept under accession number
P8617 at IPMB, Heidelberg, Germany. Air dried leaves (50 g) were
ground and exhaustively extracted with 100% methanol at room tem-
perature during an overall extraction period of 3 d. The combined ex-
tracts were evaporated under vacuum at 40 °C until dryness. The re-
sidues were further dissolved in methanol, centrifuged, and then only
the methanol soluble extract was evaporated under vacuum at 40 °C
until dryness. After freezing at −70 °C, the extract was lyophilized
yielding fine dried powder (8 g).
2.3. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC-PDA-MS/MS)
HPLC-PDA-MS/MS system was Thermofinnigan (Thermo electron
Corporation, USA) coupled with an LCQ–Duo ion trap mass spectro-
meter with an ESI source (ThermoQuest). The separation was achieved
by using a C18 reversed-phase column (Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18, Rapid
resolution, 4.6 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent, USA). A gradient of water
and acetonitrile (ACN) (0.1% formic acid each) was applied from 5% to
30% ACN in 60 min in flow rate of 1 mL/min with a 1:1 split before the
ESI source. The sample was injected automatically using autosampler
surveyor ThermoQuest. The instrument was controlled by Xcalibur
software (Xcalibur™ 2.0.7, Thermo Scientific). The MS conditions were
set as described before (Sobeh et al., 2017). The ions were detected in
the negative mode, a full scan mode and mass range of 50–2000 m/z. In
brief, to quantify the concentration of phenolic compounds, gallic acid
was used as a standard and expressed as its equivalents, whereas the
diglucoside flavonoid rutin was used for flavonoids.
2.4. Biological activity experiments
2.4.1. Antioxidant activities in vitro
Determination of total phenolic contents was investigated using the
Folin-Ciocalteu method (Ghareeb et al., 2017). The antioxidant activ-
ities were investigated by DPPH radical scavenging activity and FRAP
assay as previously described (Ghareeb et al., 2017).
2.4.2. Biocompatibility of SJE extracts on HepG2 cells
Human hepatic carcinoma cells (HepG2) were from ATCC and were
cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (EuroClone), supple-
mented with 10% foetal bovine serum (HyClone), 2 mM L-glutamine
and antibiotics (EuroClone) in a 5% CO 2 humidified atmosphere at
37 °C. Every 48–72 h the culture medium was removed and cells were
rinsed with PBS (EuroClone), detached with trypsin-EDTA (EuroClone)
and diluted in fresh complete growth medium.
The influence of SJE on proliferation of HepG2 cells was assessed by
MTT assay. In this set of experiments, cells were seeded in 96-well
plates at a density of 2 x 10 3
/well, and 24 h after seeding, increasing
concentrations of the methanolic extract (from 25 to 200 μg/mL) were
added to the cells for 24 and 48 h. Cell viability was assessed by the
MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide)
assay, as described in Guglielmi et al. (2009). Cell survival was ex-
pressed as the percentage of viable cells in the presence of the extract
compared to controls. Two groups of cells were used as control, i.e. cells
M. Sobeh et al. Journal of Functional Foods 41 (2018) 223–231
224
untreated with the extract and cells supplemented with identical vo-
lumes of methanol. Each sample was tested in three independent ana-
lyses, each carried out in triplicates.
2.4.3. Oxidative stress
To study the antioxidant effect of SJE, cells were plated at a density
of 5 x 10 4 cells/cm 2
. After 24 h, cells were incubated for 2 h in the
presence or absence of 50 μg/mL of the extract and then exposed to
300 μM sodium arsenite (SA) for 2 h.
2.4.4. Intracellular reactive oxygen species measurement
The 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2-DCFDA, Sigma-Aldrich)
method was used to measure the intracellular levels of ROS by using the
protocol described by Del Giudice et al. (2017). Briefly, at the end of
incubation, cells were incubated with the DCFDA probe (20 μM).
Fluorescence intensity was measured by a Perkin-Elmer LS50 spectro-
fluorimeter (525 nm emission wavelength, 488 nm excitation wave-
length, 300 nm/min scanning speed, 5 slit width for both excitation and
emission). ROS production was expressed as percentage of DCF fluor-
escence intensity of the sample under test, with respect to the untreated
sample. Each value was assessed by three independent experiments,
each with three determinations.
2.4.5. Intracellular GSH levels measurement
DTNB assay was performed as described by Petruk et al. (2016) and
it was used to analyze total GSH levels. Briefly, at the end of the ex-
periment, cells were detached by trypsin, centrifuged at 1000g for
10 min and resuspended in lysis buffer (0.1 M Tris HCl, pH 7.4 con-
taining 0.3 M NaCl, 0.5% NP-40 and protease inhibitors (Roche). Upon
30 min incubation on ice, lysates were centrifuged at 14,000g for
30 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford
assay and 50 μg of proteins were incubated with 3 mM EDTA, 144 μM
5,5′-dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoic acid (DTNB) in 30 mM Tris HCl pH 8.2,
centrifuged at 14,000g for 5 min at 4 °C and the absorbance of the su-
pernatant was measured at 412 nm by using a multiplate reader
(Biorad). Total GSH content in the lysate was expressed as the per-
centage of TNB, as its production is directly related to the rate of this
recycling reaction, which, in turn, is directly related to the concentra-
tion of GSH in the sample. Values are the mean of three independent
experiments, each with triplicate determinations.
2.4.6. Western blot analyses
To investigate the activation of MAPK cascade, cells were plated at a
density of 5 x 10 4 cells/cm2 in complete medium for 24 h and then
treated as described above. After treatment, cells were lysed and then
analyzed by Western blotting by using protocol described by Galano,
Arciello, Piccoli, Monti, and Amoresano (2014). Phosphorylation levels
of p38 and MAPKAPK-2 were detected by using specific antibodies
purchased from Cell Signal Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). To nor-
malize protein intensity levels, specific antibodies against internal
standards were used, i.e. anti-GAPDH (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, IL,
USA). The chemiluminescence detection system (SuperSignal® West
Pico) was from Thermo Fisher.
2.4.7. Antioxidant activity in vivo
2.4.7.1. Caenorhabditis elegans strains and maintenance. Nematodes
were maintained under the following conditions: 20 °C, on nematode
growth medium (NGM), fed with living E. coli OP50. Age synchronized
cultures were obtained by treating gravid adults with sodium
hypochlorite. The eggs were kept in M9 buffer for hatching and the
larvae were transferred to S-media seeded with living E. coli OP50
(O.D. 600nm = 1.0). The C. elegans strains such as Wild type (N2), TJ375
[hsp-16.2: GFP (gpls1)] and TJ356 were obtained from the
Caenorhabditis Genetic Center (CGC). The in vivo assays, including
survival rate and ROS concentration, were done according to our
previous description (Sobeh et al., 2018).
2.5. Hepatoprotective activity in vivo
2.5.1. Animals
The study was conducted with male Sprague-Dawley rats, weighing
200–250 g, obtained from the animal facility, King Abdulaziz
University, Geddah (KSA). Rats were kept under air-conditioned en-
vironment at 22 ± 2 °C, with a 12 h light–dark cycle. They were sup-
plied with rodent chow and water ad libitum. Animal care and experi-
ments were conducted in accordance with the protocols approved by
the Unit of Biomedical Ethics Research Committee, Faculty of Medicine,
King Abdulaziz University, following the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee guidelines.
2.5.2. Experimental design
Rats were divided into 4 groups of 6 rats each. The first group
served as a control and took water orally followed by intraperitoneal
(IP) injection of corn oil after 4 h. The second group was injected once
with 1 mL/kg of CCl 4 -corn oil 50% mixture. Group 3 was pretreated
with the known hepatoprotective lignan silymarin (200 mg/kg orally)
as a positive control. Group 4 was pretreated with S. jambos extract
(200 mg/kg orally). Four hours after the pretreatment, groups 3 and 4
have received an IP injection of CCl 4-corn oil 50% mixture.
After 24 h, blood samples were collected by cardiac puncture and
allowed to clot. The sera were obtained by centrifugation for 10 min at
3000 rpm, and then kept at −80 °C till analysis. The sera were used to
measure hepatotoxicity parameters: alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TB), total cholesterol
(TC), and triglycerides (TG). Rats were then sacrificed and liver tissues
were dissected. Representative tissue from each lobe was cut and fixed
in 10% formalin/saline and then embedded in paraffin for histo-
pathological examination. The remaining liver tissues were re-weighed,
washed, and homogenized in ice-cold PBS to yield 10% w/v homo-
genates and then stored at −80 °C till analyses.
2.5.3. Biochemical analyses
Activities of serum ALT and AST, serum levels of TB, TC, and TG
were determined colourimetrically using Mindray BS-120 clinical
chemistry auto-analyzer (Shenzhen Mindray Bio-medical Electronics
Co. Ldt., Shenzhen, China). Levels of glutathione (GSH), lipid perox-
idation marker malondialdehyde (MDA) and the activity of the anti-
oxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD) were determined using
the commercially available kits (Biodiagnostics, Cairo, Egypt).
2.5.4. Histopathological examination
Storage of tissue samples was done in 10% buffered neutral formalin
for 24 h and tap water was used for washing. For dehydration, serial
dilutions of methyl, ethyl and absolute ethyl alcohols were used.
Specimens were embedded in xylene for clarification, immersed in
paraffin, and kept for 24 h at 56 °C inside hot air oven. Slide microtome
was used to prepare paraffin bee wax tissue sections at 4 μm thickness
that were placed on glass slides, had the paraffin cleared, and stained
either with eosin and hematoxylin for histopathology. Glass slides were
examined through the light electric microscope (Olympus BX-50
Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) (Banchroft, Stevens, & Turner,
1996).
2.6. Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses for biological data were carried out three times
unless otherwise mentioned in the procedure. Data are presented as
mean and S.D. One way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to carry
out the comparisons that were followed by post hoc analysis using
Tukey’s test. A level of p < .05 was taken as cut off to accept statistical
significance. GraphPad Prism software, version 5.00 (GraphPad
Software, Inc. La Jolla, CA, USA) and (SigmaPlot® 11.0) were used to
perform all the required statistical analyses.
M. Sobeh et al. Journal of Functional Foods 41 (2018) 223–231
225
