Syzygium jambos - A PHARMACOLOGICAL REVIEW

Rose apples, scientifically called as Syzygium jambos is addressed by
several common names which reflects the large number of areas in
which it occurs as a garden or fruit tree or as an invader. They are
commonly called rose apples since the fruit flesh has the sweet taste of
rose petals. It is native to South East Asian regions belonging to the
family Myrtaceae. It is a sensitive fruit which get bruises easily. The
fruits are very light in weight because they are hollow. The word ‘Rose
apple’ has appeared in the Buddhism and ancient Indian history. In the
Chinese system of traditional medicine, the fruit and root bark are
believed to be of use as a blood coolant. In India, traditionally the fruit
has been used as brain and liver tonic and to prepare rose water and
wine. Scientific studies suggest that rose apple has diverse health
benefits such as antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antiviral, antidermatophytic,
anticancer, and hepatoprotective activity effects. The seeds are also employed in the
treatment of diabetes, diarrhoea and dysentery and an extract of the seeds is found to have
antibacterial activity. The chemical analysis of the extract from the fruit showed the presence
of flavonoids, volatile oil and aldehyde derivatives as main constituent. Medicinally the fruit
is reported to have anti-cancer and the ethanol extract was effective as a free radical
scavenger in the 1, 1‐diphenyl‐2‐picrylhydrazyl free radical scavenging assay, reducing total
phenol capacity, total flavonoid content, and total antioxidant capacity. This review paper
presents an overview of Syzygium jambos fruit and its pharmacological actions.
www.wjpps.com │ Vol 10, Issue 4, 2021. │ ISO 9001:2015 Certified Journal │ 843
Subbulakshmi et al. World Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
KEYWORDS: Fruit, Pharmacological action, Rose water, Syzygium jambos.
INTRODUCTION
The name Syzygium was adopted by Gaertner (1788) from Browne’s (1756) genus Suzygium
but with a corrected spelling. It is originated from the Latin ‘syzygia’ and from Greek
‘syzygos’, which means yoked together refers to the arrangement of the leaves. Syzygium
jambos, rose apple originating in Southeast Asia and occurring widely elsewhere, has been
introduced as an ornamental, fragrant and fruit tree. Like many other fruits to which the word
"apple" has been attached, the rose apple in no way resembles an apple, neither in the tree nor
in its fruit. In fact, they are closely related to the guava and is scientifically known
as Syzygium jambos Alston. They were formerly distilled four times to make rose water, said
to be equal to the best obtained from rose petals.
The Rose Apple is said to be the golden fruit of immortality and the fruit juice said to have
created the river Gambu. In Buddhism, the Rose Apple Tree is considered sacred, referred to
as the Enlightenment Tree because as a young boy Buddha entered his first state of
meditation under this tree during which the shadow of the tree did not change or move. In
ancient Sanskrit, India was referred by the ancient Indians themselves as Jambudvipa, which
means Rose-apple-land. Thus, this species has many historical stories to show off. The fruit is
usually eaten raw, around the tropical world mostly eaten out-of-hand by children. Rose
apples spoil very quickly so fruits should be used soon after picking. Hence, they are eaten
fresh or used in preserves. The large, hollow seed cavity is utilized to stuff the fruits and bake
them.
Fruit extract can be used to make a sweet smelling rose water. The rose water obtained
contains antioxidants and Soothes skin irritation, soothes sore throats, reduces skin redness,
helps prevent and treats infections, heals cuts, scars, and burns. It also enhances mood and
relieves headaches. Rose Apples ripen from the outside of the tree towards the center, so the
rose apples out the outside of the tree will ripen first. Rose apples are one of the most
common hosts for fruit flies like Anastrephasuspensaor guava fly which will lay their eggs in
overripe or spoiled rose apples. The larvae of these flies will then consume the fruit in order
to gain nutrients until they can proceed into the pupa stage.[1,2,3,4]
Local names
English: Rose apple, Hindi: Gulab jamun, Kannada: Pannerale, Paneer hannu, Tamil:
www.wjpps.com │ Vol 10, Issue 4, 2021. │ ISO 9001:2015 Certified Journal │ 844
Subbulakshmi et al. World Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
Champai.[5]
Taxonimical classification
Kingdom- Plantae– Plants
Phylum- Tracheophyta - Vascular Plants
Class- Magnoliopsida- dicotyledonae
Order- Myrtales
Family- Myrtaceae
Genus- Syzygium
Species- jambos[6]
Habitats
It is native to upper Burma and parts of malay archipelago. However, the species have
become widely distributed to many tropical regions such as Carrabean island, Fiji, Australia,
Myanmar and Mexico. In India, it is found in regions of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and
north eastern regions. Rose apple requires moist climate and even distribution of rainfall
often grown on stream banks.[7, 8]
Seasons
In Jamaica and Puerto Rico, the rose apple trees bloom and fruit sporadically nearly all year,
though somewhat less in summer than at other times. The main season in the Bahamas and in
Florida is May through July. The fruiting period varies in different parts of India. In South
India, blooming usually occurs in January, with fruit ripening in March and April, whereas in
the Circars, ripening takes place in April and May. In the central part of the country,
flowering occurs in February, March and April and the fruits ripen from June through July.
Then again, it is reported that there are varieties that produce fruit in February and March.[1]
Botanical description of the fruit
Fruits are usually dull yellow except the Malaysian variety will have reddish skin, globose to
ovoid or slightly pear-shaped crowned by 4-lobed calyx. The skin is thin and smooth that
covers a juicy and crispy flesh that is sweet and has rose scent. Each fruit has a hollow centre
which contains1 to 4 brown, rough-coated, medium-hard, more or less rounded seeds, 3/8 to
5/8 in (1-1.6 cm) thick, which loosen from the inside of the wall and rattle when the fruit is
shaken. Fragments of the seed coat may be found in the cavity. The seeds are rough-coated,
medium hard and reddish brown in colour which are said to be poisonous[1,9](Fig 1)
