Syzygium jambos (L.) Alston (Myrtaceae) - a new record introduced to the flora of Yemen

The Republic of Yemen lies in the southwestern
corner of the Arabian Peninsula. It extends between
latitudes 1 2° 40’ to 1 9° 00’N. and longitudes 42° 30’
to 53° 05’E. It is bordered by Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in the north, the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of
Aden in the south, Sultanate of Oman in the east,
and the Red Sea in the west. The study area (Tu-
ban) is a district of Lahej governorate. Lahej gover-
norate is located at the southwestern part of Yemen
at latitudes between 1 2° 30’ to 1 4° 00’ N. and longi-
tudes between 43° 30’ to 45° 30’ E. This governora-
te is bounded in the east by Abyan governorate, in
the west by Taiz governorate, in the north by Al-
Bayda, Al-Dhalaa governorates and some parts of
Taiz governorate, in the south by Aden governorate
and the Gulf of Aden. The central of Lahej governo-
rate (Al-Hawtah) distances from Sana'a (the capital
of Yemen) about 320 km south (Fig. 1 ).
This paper reports the recent finding of planted
Mohamed et al. Syzygium jambos - a new record introduced to the flora of Yemen
Journal of Biology and Earth Sciences, 201 4, Vol 4, Issue 1 , B52-B56 B53
species from Yemen. The genus Syzygium Gaertn.
(Myrtaceae) is a monotypic genus in Yemen [1 , 2].
Syzygium, a tree genus represented by more than
1 .200 species, is mainly distributed in the Old World
tropics from Africa eastwards to the Hawaiian Is-
lands and from India and southern China south-
wards to southeastern Australia and New Zealand.
Its center distribution is in Malesia [3]. Syzygium is
derived from the Greek syzgios (paired), on account
of the leaves and twigs that in several species grow
at the same point [4]. Shareef et al. [5] reported Sy
zygium claviflorum (Roxb.) Wall. ex A. M. Cowan et
Cowan, a Myrtaceous tree species for the first time
for South India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
During the intensive floristic survey in the Tuban
district, Lahej governorate, southern Yemen in
201 3, a small tree species of Syzygium Gaertn.
(Myrtaceae) collected with edible fruits, it was iden-
tified as Syzygium jambos (L.) Alston. This species
is here documented with a detailed description and
color photograph as it is shown (Fig. 2). Illustrations
are provided to facilitate the identification of the
species.
The identification key to this species is provided
below:
Filaments c. 4 cm long; Hypanthium and calyx to-
gether c. 1 8 mm long; petiole mostly up to c. 5 mm
long ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . S. jambos
Filaments up to 1 cm long; Hypanthium and calyx
together 3-6 mm long; petiole mostly up to c. 1 5 mm
long ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ..... S. guineense.
RESULTS
Taxonomic
Syzygium jambos (L.) Alston, Handb. Fl. Ceylon
6:1 1 5. 1 931 . Fig. 2.
Synonym: Eugenia jambos L. Sp. Pl. 1 : 470. 1 753.
An evergreen small tree up to 6 m tall, often
branching from low on the trunk and with a dense
wide spreading crown and cylindrical stem, it is so-
metimes quadrangular when it is young. Leaves
opposite, oblong-lanceolate, 7.5-20 cm long, and
3.4-7.8 cm wide, thin leathery, cuneate at base,
acute or subacuminate at the apex, shiny dark gre-
en above, lighter green and glandular punctate un-
derneath, petiole c. 5 mm long. Inflorescence 3-5
cm long, usually terminal, cymes, with 3-9 flowers,
peduncle 1 -1 .5 cm. The flowers are attractive, cre-
amy-white or greenish-white, 5 cm wide. Hypan-
thium obconic, 8-1 0 mm. Calyx lobes 4, semi-
orbicular, ca. 6 × 8-9 mm. Petals 8, distinct, gre-
enish-white, broadly ovate, ca. 1 .4 cm. Stamens
numerous up to 2 cm long, anthers ca. 1 .5 mm.
Style 1 .4 cm. Fruits are globose to ovoid or slightly
pear-shaped, up to 5 cm in diam., crowned by per-
sistent 4-lobed calyx, with smooth, thin, pale yellow
or whitish skin when ripe, tinged with rose, with oil
glands. Each fruit contains 1 - or 2-seeded, that are
2-2.5 cm in diameter.
Flowering and fruiting: June-September.
Occurrence
This species is often Introduced in Tuban district,
Lahej governorate, where it grows in a deep loamy
soil, on altitudes 1 39-1 44 m a.s.l. According to [6],
the geological characteristic of Lahej governorate is
loess-like loams with interlayers of sand – gravel
sediments, while the mineral composition is mont-
morillonite, hydromica, limestone, quartz and mica.
The average temperature is about 29°C. December
Mohamed et al. Syzygium jambos - a new record introduced to the flora of Yemen
Journal of Biology and Earth Sciences, 201 4, Vol 4, Issue 1 , B52-B56 B54
and January being the lowest average 25.5°C and
July and August the highest average 32°C, the ave-
rage relative humidity is 69%, the highest being in
April 74% and the lowest in July 65%. Although the
rainfall is low, average less than 1 20 mm per year
from May to October [7].
Distribution
According to Orwa et al. [4], S. jambos (L.) Al-
ston is native in Guatemala, Honduras, Malaysia,
Panama, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands (US). While
exotic in Australia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Jamaica, Ja-
pan, Mexico, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Reunion, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Ta-
iwan, Province of China, Thailand, Tonga, US, Zan-
zibar. It is here reported for the first time in Yemen.
Previous report from Yemen: None.
Specimens examined
Yemen, Tuban district, Lahej governorate, on
alts.1 39 m a.s.l., 1 3° 03' 47.6'' N, 44° 54' 1 9.8'' E,
25. 7. 201 3, Mazen 0067; 1 44 m a.s.l., 1 3° 03' 59.8''
N, 44° 53' 1 6.0'' E, 21 . 9. 201 3, Mazen 0073.
DISCUSSION
Myrtaceae includes c. 1 29 genera and more
than 4000 species, the members of this family are
mostly found in mainly Tropical and warm tempera-
te regions, chiefly they are found in Australia and
Tropical America, the main center of the distribution
of this family is Australia [8-1 0]. Generally the plants
are trees or moderate-sized or small trees, or
shrubs [1 0]. In Yemen the family is represented by
four important genera viz.; Eucalyptus, Myrtus, Psi
dium and Syzygium. Eucalyptus includes nine in-
troduced species viz. (E. camaldulensis Dehnh.;
E. globulus Labill.; E. gomphocephala DC.; E. gran
dis Hill ex Maiden; E. marginata Sm.; E. microthera
F. Muell; E. occidentalis Endl; E. tereticornis Sm.;
E. torquata Luehm.), while the rest three genera are
represented by only one species, they are as fol-
lows; Myrtus communis L., Psidium guajava L. and
Syzygium guineense (Willd.) DC. [1 , 2]. Syzygium
contains approximately 1 .200 species is mainly di-
stributed in the Old World Tropics from Africa to the
West Pacific and Malesia [1 1 ].
In Yemen the genus is represented by only one
species viz. Syzygium guineense, in this paper we
add Syzygium jambos for the first time for Yemeni
flora. We found it at altitude between 1 39-1 44 m
Mohamed et al. Syzygium jambos - a new record introduced to the flora of Yemen
Journal of Biology and Earth Sciences, 201 4, Vol 4, Issue 1 , B52-B56 B55
a.s.l., where it grows in a deep loamy soil. Syzy
gium species can be live on various habitats [1 2].
Economically, the family is fairly important, some
plants are of medicinal value while others produce
edible fruits rich in vitamins. Certain plants are
grown as ornamentals in the gardens.
A list of important plants is given below:
1 . Eucalyptus L'Hér.
Many species are planted for timber, firewood,
oil production or ornament. The oil is extracted from
its leaves which is used in perfumery, cure asthma
and bronchitis. The timber is used for bridge, rail-
way sleeper, building materials, plywood industries,
etc. [9, 1 0]. In Yemen the Eucalyptus trees are
planted as ornament in street, near houses and
fields.
2. Myrtus communis L.
It is grown for its attractive foliage, flowers and
berries. Its berries, leaves as well as essential oil
are frequently used for various ailments like gastric
ulcer, diarrhoea, dysentery, vomiting, rheumatism,
haemorrhages, deep sinuses, leucorrhoea and co-
smetic purposes like hair fall control. The leaves,
berries and twigs are used in flavouring of food and
wines. In past times, ripe fruits were used as food
integrators because of their high vitamin contents
[1 3]. In our country, Yemen, M. communis is cultiva-
ted for its leaves, which is used for hair fall control
and hair softly.
3. Psidium guajava L.
The fruit has a characteristic odor and is eaten
fresh or cooked, but it is principally used for the
preparation of jams, jellies, pastes and other similar
products [1 4]. The bark of the root is given in the
diarrhoea of children, the bark and leaves are used
for tanning [1 0]. In Yemen the plants are grown for
its edible fruits rich in vitamin C, the fruit is eaten
fresh and drunk as a juice.
4. Syzygium guineense (Willd.) DC. (Table 1 )
Fruit of S. guineense are eaten and used as re-
medy for dysentery. Timber is suitable for poles,
posts and for building and bridge construction, while
a decoction of the bark is used as an antidiarrhoeic.
In traditional medicine, liquid from the pounded bark
and roots is mixed with water and is used as purga-
tive [4]. In Yemen, fruits of S. guineense are gathe-
red and eaten, it is also planted as ornament near
houses.
5. Syzygium jambos (L.) Alston (Table 1 )
The plants are cultivated as a source of fruit and
as a garden ornamental. Timber has been used
to make furniture, spokes for wheels, arms for
easy chairs, knees for all kinds of boats, beams
for construction, frames for musical instruments
and packing cases. It is also popular for general
turnery. The bark is used for tanning and yielding
a brown dye. Essential oil is extracted from the
leaves to be used in perfume productions. In India
the fruit is regarded as atonic for brain and liver.
An infusion of the fruit acts as a diuretic, sweetened
preparation of the flowers is believed to reduce
fever [4, 1 5]. In Yemen, S. jambos is cultivated for
its edible fruit and as ornamental.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are indebted to Dr. Adel Abdulkhaliq
Abdulkareem of the English Language Department,
Faculty of Education, Aden University, Yemen for
proofreading the article