Syzygium Jambos Wikipedia

Description and Ethnobotany
Growth Form: Small, evergreen tree with a dense, spreading crown. Habitat: Occurs in the tropics and subtropics, but it grows best in the tropics at altitudes of 0 - 1200 m. Trunk: Short, low-branching trunk has brown, smooth bark. Foliage: Glossy, opposite leaves are oblong to lanceolate with entire leaf margin and long tapering tip (9 - 26 cm long, 1.5 - 6 cm wide). Flowers: Large pom-pom shaped flowers (5-10 cm wide) are arranged in inflorescences known as corymbs. Fruits: Fleshy, pitted fruits are known as drupes (2.5 - 5 cm wide). They are whitish to yellow, round to egg-shaped and smell like rosewater. The fruit apex has a crown-like structure formed by a persistent calyx (the outermost layer of a flower that often resembles small leaves). Landscaping: This species is grown as a roadside tree or fruit tree in home gardens. Cultivation: This species is tolerant of most soil types including waterlogged soils. Optimal growth will occur in acidic to neutral soils (pH 5.5 - 7). Trees should be spaced 5 m x 6 m apart. It is susceptible to fungal diseases, such as root rot, leaf spots and anthracnose. Propagation: Propagate by seed, budding, air layering, and grafting. Propagation by seed is the most common method, but seeds do not store well and must be sown promptly.Etymology: The genus name "Syzygium" is derived from the Greek word "suzugos" which means joined. Syzygium used to be the name of a Jamaican plant species with paired leaves and branches. It is commonly known as Rose Apple, because the fruits can be distilled to produce rosewater.
Ethnobotanical Uses
Edible Plant Parts (Edible Fruits)
Food (Fruit & Vegetable)
[Others]: Food: The fruits are consumed raw or cooked. Although this species is grown in home gardens for its fruits, it is usually not grown in commercial orchards. Other: Essential oils in the leaves are extracted by distillation and used in the perfume industry.
Landscaping Features
Plant & Rootzone Preference - Tolerance 	Fertile Loamy Soils, Well-Drained Soils, Poor Infertile Soils, Waterlogged Soils (Drains Site), Saline Soils / Salt Spray
Landscape Uses 	Roadside Tree / Palm, Coastal
Thematic Landscaping 	Economic Garden
Plant Care and Propagation
Light Preference 	Full Sun
Water Preference 	Moderate Water
Plant Growth Rate 	Moderate
Foliar
Foliage Retention 	Evergreen
Mature Foliage Colour(s) 	Green
Mature Foliage Texture(s) 	Glossy / Shiny

Non - Foliar and Storage
Trunk Type (Non Palm) 	Woody
Mature Bark Texture 	Smooth
Root Type 	Underground (Tap Root)
Floral (Angiosperm)
Flower & Plant Sexuality 1 	Bisexual Flowers
Flower Colour(s) 	White
Flower Symmetry 	Radial
Fruit, Seed and Spore
Mature Fruit Colour(s) - Angiosperms and Gymnosperms 	White
Fruit Classification 	Simple Fruit
Fruit Type 1 	Fleshy Fruit
Others
Master ID 	1868
Species ID 	3161
Flora Disclaimer 	The information in this website has been compiled from reliable sources, such as reference works on medicinal plants. It is not a substitute for medical advice or treatment and NParks does not purport to provide any medical advice. Readers should always consult his/her physician before using or consuming a plant for medicinal purposes. 
