Inhibitory effects of Syzygium jambos extract on biomarkers of endothelial cell activation

Background

Disordered endothelial cell activation plays an important role in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis, cancer, sepsis, viral infections, and inflammatory responses. There is interest in developing novel therapeutics to regulate endothelial cell function in atherothrombotic, metabolic, vascular, and hematological diseases. Extracts from leaves of the Syzygium jambos (L.) Alston (S. jambos) trees have been proposed to treat cardiovascular diseases and diabetes through unclear mechanisms. We investigated the effects of the S. jambos extract on biomarkers of endothelial dysfunction and immune responses in the human endothelial cell line, EA.hy926.
Methods

Leaves of S. jambos were collected, concocted and lyophilized. To study the effects of S. jambos on endothelial cell activation, we used the human endothelial cell line. IL-6 levels were measured using qPCR and ELISA. PDI activity was measured using Insulin Turbidity and Di-E-GSSG assays. CM-H2DCFDA was used to study ROS levels. Migration assay was used to study S. jambos effect on ex vivo human polymorphonuclear and human mononuclear cells.
Results

Our results show that incubation of EA.hy926 cells with ET-1 led to a 6.5 ± 1.6 fold increase in IL-6 expression by qPCR, an event that was blocked by S. jambos. Also, we observed that ET-1 increased extracellular protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) activity that was likewise dose-dependently blocked by S. jambos (IC50 = 14 μg/mL). Consistent with these observations, ET-1 stimulated ex vivo human polymorphonuclear and mononuclear cell migration that also was dose-dependently blocked by S. jambos. In addition, ET-1 stimulation led to significant increases in ROS production that were sensitive to S. jambos.
Conclusion

Our results suggest that the S. jambos extract represents a novel cardiovascular protective pharmacological approach to regulate endothelial cell activation, IL-6 expression, and immune-cell responses.

Peer Review reports
Background

Endothelial cells play an important role in maintaining vascular tone, platelet aggregation, cell adhesiveness, leukocyte migration, coagulation, and inflammation. Disordered endothelial cell activation contributes to the pathophysiology of diabetes [1], atherosclerosis, cancer, chronic inflammation, sepsis, and viral infections [2,3,4,5], such as observed in patients with the recently described Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) [6, 7]. It is characterized, in part, by increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cytokine production, including endothelin-1 (ET-1) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), leading to apoptosis, increased leukocyte migration, accelerated endothelial cell senescence. These cytokines are important contributors to the cytokine release syndrome, also known as cytokine storm that is observed following viral infection, sepsis, and immunotherapy in cancer [8,9,10,11,12].

ET-1 is a 21-amino acid peptide and potent vasoconstrictor that acts via paracrine and autocrine mechanisms to increase vascular permeability leading to rapid and robust leukocyte recruitment [13]. ET-1 plays an important role in sepsis, cytokine release syndrome [12], and the cardiovascular complications of diabetes [14]. ET-1 induces oxidative stress in part by increasing vascular inflammatory responses, including increased IL-6 production [15, 16] and ROS generation resulting in vascular wall modifications [17, 18]. We reported that ET-1 also increases extracellular protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) activity and is secreted by endothelial cells [19]. PDI is an oxidoreductase enzyme, mostly known for its effects on platelet activation, including integrin-mediated platelet and leukocyte function in thrombogenesis [20, 21], cellular adhesion [22], nitric oxide (NO) delivery [23], leukocyte adherence [24] and oxidative stress sensor in endothelial cells [25]. Therefore, modulation of ET-1 levels and its effects are of great concern in cardiovascular diseases.

The pharmacological applicability of extracts from leaves of the Syzygium jambos (S. jambos) (L.) Alston tree, also known as Eugenia jambos, as a potential source of polyphenols for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, including hypertension, has been previously proposed [26]. S. jambos has been traditionally used to treat diabete [27]. S. jambos has anti-inflammatory activity [28, 29], antioxidant [30] and is reported to have antimicrobial properties as well [28, 31]. There are reports showing that various polyphenols have anti-inflammatory [32] and antioxidant properties [33, 34] and can prevent ET-1 effects [35]. However, in humans, the use of plant extracts is limited because of the absence of randomized controlled clinical trials due, in part, to the scarcity of information on the mechanisms by which polyphenols such as S. jambos mediate their effects. Our present study was designed to evaluate the effects of S. jambos on endothelial dysfunction. We hypothesized that the aqueous leave extracts from S. jambos would regulate ET-1-stimulated human endothelial cell function. We show that aqueous extracts from S. jambos inhibits PDI activity and decrease IL-6 expression, ROS production, and cell migration. This work describes novel and important effects of Syzygium jambos extract on endothelin-1 signaling and endothelial cell dysfunction.
Materials and methods
Materials

Folin–Ciocalteu reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), gallic acid was purchased from ACROS Organics, EA.hy926 (ATCC, CRL-2922) were obtained from Manassas, VA. IL-6 ELISA kit from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). QCM Chemotaxis 3-μm cell migration assay system was purchased from Millipore (Bedford, MA) and TRIzol reagent from Invitrogen (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The Phusion reverse transcriptase PCR kit was obtained from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, acetyl ester (CM-H2DCFDA) dye from Life Technologies, Trolox, Protein disulfide Isomerase from bovine liver, Rutin, bacitracin, Dithiothreitol (DTT), and all other reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Plant collection, identification, and preparation

Leaves of S. jambos were collected in Puerto Rico in the town of Naguabo (18°14′29.2“ N and 65°45’30.8” W). Vouchers of S. jambos (019663) were numbered and deposited at the George Proctor Herbarium (SJ) in Puerto Rico. Dr. Robert Ross, Botanist from the University of Puerto Rico in Cayey, identified and classified the botanical species. Concoctions were prepared by boiling 30 g of plant material in 100 ml of distilled water. After concentration to 15 ml, the decoctions were filtered through a cheesecloth. Aliquots (5 ml) of the extracts were freeze-dried using a lyophilizer to determine the initial concentration of the rich-polyphenol extracts (μg/ml).
Quality control of extract

The HPLC fingerprinting profile of plant extracts was carried out using a Shimadzu HPLC system with a Reverse Phase C18 column. The HPLC separations were conducted using an acetonitrile gradient with 0.5% acetic acid in water for 75 min with a 0.7 mL/min flow rate. The UV–VIS spectra (700–200 nm) were recorded for each extract using a UV-VIS spectrometer. The maxima absorption wavelengths were identified. The extraction factor (EF) of bioactive molecules from each extract were calculated to compare the yields of extraction in different batches, considering the absorption values (A) recorded for each λmax, multiplied with the dilution factor (d) and applying the following relation: EF = A (λmax)xd. This ensured that a similar amount of bioactive molecules were present in each experiment.
Quantification of phenolic content

The total phenolic content was determined using a spectrophotometry method [36]. The S. jambos extract was prepared as a 1.0 mg/ml aqueous solution. Extract (0.5 ml) was mixed with 1 ml of Folin–Ciocalteu reagent (2 N) and was left to stand at room temperature for 1 min. The sodium carbonate (700 mM Na2CO3) solution (3 ml) was subsequently added, and the solution was allowed to stand at room temperature for 2 h. Supernatant absorbance was measured at 760 nm using a UV-VIS spectrometer. The results were compared with the standards prepared similarly (with known gallic acid concentrations). All samples were analyzed three times in separate experiments and were expressed as gallic acid equivalents in mg/g of dry extract.
Quantification of flavonoid content

The total flavonoid content was determined using a colorimetric method [37]. The S. jambos extract was prepared as a 1.0 mg/ml aqueous solution. The extract (1 ml) was mixed with 0.4 ml of a 5% NaNO2 solution. The mixture was allowed to stay at room temperature for 6 min; 0.4 ml of a 10% AlCl3*9H2O solution was added for 6 min, followed by the addition of a 4 ml 4% NaOH solution. The ethanol solution (70%) was added to reach a final volume of 10 ml. The solution was mixed and kept at room temperature for 15 min. Absorbance was measured at 510 nm using a UV-VIS spectrometer. Comparisons were made against standards prepared similarly (with known rutin concentrations). Results were expressed as rutin mg/g of dry extract. All samples were analyzed three times in separate experiments.
Cell culture

Human endothelial cells EA.hy926 (ATCC, CRL 2922) were maintained in DMEM (containing 4.5 g/L glucose) with 10% FBS as previously described by us [38]. Briefly, twelve hours before treatment, cells were serum-starved in DMEM with 0.2% FBS. At the treatment time, cells were washed with PBS and incubated with vehicle, ET-1, or S. jambos extract in DMEM with 0.2% FBS. The cells were harvested for analyses after 24-h or 48-h incubation.
PDI. activity assays
Insulin turbidity assay

This assay is based on the measurement of the catalytic reduction of insulin as described by Lundstrom and Holmgren [39]. PDI facilitates the reduction of insulin in the presence of Dithiothreitol (DTT). The reduced insulin chains aggregate and the turbidity is monitored spectrophotometrically at 650 nm. The assay was performed in a 96-well plate format and a volume of 100 μl in the presence of 1 mM DTT, 1 μg PDI (Sigma), 0.15 mM bovine pancreas insulin (Sigma), and 0.2 mM EDTA in 100 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0. The progress of the reaction was monitored on a 96-well plate reader (Multiscan FC Microplate Reader, Fisher Scientific) at 650 nm for 60 min at 25 °C. The non-enzymatic reduction of insulin by DTT was recorded in control well without PDI.
Di-E-GSSG fluorescence assay

A soluble PDI activity assay was performed following previously described protocols and optimized in our laboratories [19]. Briefly, [E-GSH] formation is recorded for 30 min (ex: 525 nm; em: 545 nm) at room temperature, and fluorescence intensity is recorded and plotted as a function of time to calculate the conjugate’s reduction rate. Measurements were performed in the presence or absence of 16.5 ug/ml Phenylarsine oxide (PAO), a well-known vicinal thiol blocker. PBS was used as vehicle. Supernatant PDI activity was determined by fluorescence recording of [E-GSH] formation.
Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA was prepared with 1 mL of TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The Phusion reverse transcriptase PCR kit (New England Biolabs) was used to make 20 μL of cDNA from 1 μg of R.N.A. Gene expression was analyzed using real-time PCR using TaqMan gene expression assay for IL-6 and GAPDH (Applied Biosystems) in a StepOne Plus from ABI. The ΔΔ cycle threshold method was used to determine mRNA levels. IL-6 gene expression was normalized to GAPDH levels.
ELISA

To determine the concentration of IL-6 in cell culture media of control or treated endothelial cells, an ELISA kit from R&D Systems was used following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Cell migration assay

Cell migration was carried out using the QCM Chemotaxis 3-μm cell migration assay system (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Ex vivo human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) and mononuclear cells (MNC) from healthy human subjects were isolated using Polymorphprep following approval by the Brigham and Women’s Hospital– Institutional Review Board (Approval num. BWH IRB# 2009P000491) and written informed consent was provided to volunteers who participated in this study. Cells were seeded into the migration chamber as per the manufacturer’s protocol. The supernatant of endothelial cells was incubated for 2 h with the vehicle (PBS), ET-1, or S. jambos extract and placed in the lower chamber. After allowing cell migration for 2 h, PMN and MNC cells that migrated through the membrane were stained with Cyquant and quantified using Spectra Max Gemini EM (Molecular Devices) at 480/520 nm.
Measurements of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)

The 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, acetyl ester (CM-H2DCFDA) dye from Life Technologies was used as a probe to measure ROS. Endothelial cells were cultured in 6-well plates and were serum-starved for 12 h in DMEM with 0.2% FBS, washed with fresh DMEM, and incubated with DMEM premixed with 10 μM CM-H2DCFDA for 1 h at 37 °C. Cells were washed twice with PBS to remove the loading buffer, and cells were allowed to recover for 10 min at 37 °C for cellular esterases to deacetylate H2DCFDA. Cells were then stimulated with ET-1 with or without S. jambos extracts and Trolox (200 μM) for 1 h, releasing a variety of ROS species, which oxidize H2DCF into DCF Cells were washed once with Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution and incubated in the same buffer containing 5 μg of CM-H2DCFDA /ml at 37 °C for 30 min. Intracellular fluorescence was detected with excitation at 495 nm and emission at 520 nm using Spectra Max Gemini EM.
Annexin-V apoptosis assay

EA.hy926 cells were cultured in 96-well plates and were serum-starved for 12 h in DMEM with 0.2% FBS before the vehicle, ET-1, or plant extract was added for 24 h. The Annexin V FITC Assay Kit (Cayman Chemical) was used and analyzed using Spectra Max Gemini EM at 485/535 nm per manufacturer protocols to determine the percentage of apoptotic cells.
Statistical analysis

Data were analyzed by one-way or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test or Student’s t-test when appropriate. The p-value was set to be <0.05. Data are expressed as mean ± SE of (n) independent experiments unless otherwise stated.
Results
S. jambos inhibits ET-1 induced PDI activity

The concentration of polyphenols and flavonoids in S. jambos aqueous leaf extract was determined using spectrophotometric methods as described in methods. We determined that S. jambos aqueous leaf extract contains polyphenols 135 ± 7 Gallic acid mg/g and flavonoid 99 ± 9 rutin mg/g. Chagas et al. described the extract composition of Syzygium by HPLC-UV/Vis and LC-MS/MS using purified standards as calibrators at different wavelengths to validate its composition as myricetin as the most abundant flavonoid with gallic acid and quercentin [40] with high antioxidant potency. Eight peaks were identified in the S. jambos aqueous leaf extract HPLC fingerprinting used for quality control (Suppl Fig. 1).

One of the effects of S. jambos that has a lot of interest was its effects on protein disulfide isomerase (PDI). It has been shown that myricetin [41] and quercentin [20] inhibit the reductase activity of PDI. As the major components of the S. jambos, we evaluated the effect of extract preparation on PDI activity. We measured in vitro PDI activity in the presence or absence of the S. jambos aqueous leaf extract using the insulin turbidity assay. It shows a significant reduction of 5 μg of purified PDI activity with 5 μg/mL and up to 75% inhibition at 100 μg/mL of S. jambos extract (p = 0.004, n = 3) (Fig. 1A). We also observed that S. jambos extract induced a dose-dependent inhibitory effect on purified PDI with an IC50 of 14 μg/mL (Fig. 1B).