Syzygium Jambos - An Overview

Soft Scale Insects their Biology, Natural Enemies and Control

Eliahu Swirski, ... Manes Wysoki, in World Crop Pests, 1997
Milviscutulus mangiferae (Green) (Mango shield scale)

In Israel, M. mangiferae is liable to cause serious damage to Syzygium jambos, Artocarpus heterophyllus and guava trees (Avidov and Harpaz, 1969). Trees of Syzygium cumini (=Eugenia jambolana) in a park at Tel Aviv, were heavily infested by this coccid, which debilitated them, causing leaf- and fruit-drop and impairing fruit formation. However, the most noticeable damage was the nuisance caused by the honeydew and sooty mould, which dropped on the parked cars and on pedestrians (Gerson, 1975). These outbreaks of M. mangiferae in Tel Aviv were tentatively attributed by Gerson (1975) to exhaust fumes from the cars, which were thought to kill the natural enemies of the pest. Since the tallness of the trees and their urban location prevented chemical treatment with toxic scalicides, it was recommended to cut them down or severely prune them. (See also Section 3.3.4).
Soft Scale Insects their Biology, Natural Enemies and Control

Eliahu Swirski, ... Manes Wysoki, in World Crop Pests, 1997
Milviscutulus mangiferae (Green) (Mango shield scale)

In Israel, M. mangiferae is liable to cause serious damage to Syzygium jambos, Artocarpus heterophyllus and guava trees (Avidov and Harpaz, 1969). Trees of Syzygium cumini (=Eugenia jambolana) in a park at Tel Aviv, were heavily infested by this coccid, which debilitated them, causing leaf- and fruit-drop and impairing fruit formation. However, the most noticeable damage was the nuisance caused by the honeydew and sooty mould, which dropped on the parked cars and on pedestrians (Gerson, 1975). These outbreaks of M. mangiferae in Tel Aviv were tentatively attributed by Gerson (1975) to exhaust fumes from the cars, which were thought to kill the natural enemies of the pest. Since the tallness of the trees and their urban location prevented chemical treatment with toxic scalicides, it was recommended to cut them down or severely prune them. (See also Section 3.3.4).
Wax apple (Syzygium samarangense (Blume) Merr. and L.M. Perry) and related species

Z.-H Shü, ... H.-L Lin, in Postharvest Biology and Technology of Tropical and Subtropical Fruits: Mangosteen to White Sapote, 2011
Origin and worldwide importance

The wax apple (Syzygium samarangense (Blume) Merr. and L.M. Perry; other names are Java apple, waxjambu and water apple), which belongs to the Myrtaceae, is native to the Malaysian Archipelago and to the Andaman and Nicobar islands where the trees grow in coastal rainforests (Morton, 1987). Other species with similar fruits for fresh consumption that are commercially important are the water apple Syzygium aqueum, the rose apple Syzygium jambos, and the Malay apple Syzygium malaccense (Nakasone and Pall, 1988). All these species have spread throughout the tropical areas of the world. The fruit of Syzygium jambos, the rose apple, is relatively round to oval shaped and has the scent of a rose (Morton, 1987). The flower and fruit of Syzygium malaccense, the Malay apple, are the most beautiful of those of the four species. The fruit of the water apple (Syzygium aqueum) is very similar to that of the wax apple (Syzygium samarangense), but it is smaller and insipid. The fruit of the wax apple is larger and sweeter (Shü and Paull, 2008; see Plate XL in the colour section between pages 238 and 239) and since it is the most delicious, it has been commercially planted in many countries, such as Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia (Shü et al., 2008, 2009). Most research focuses on Syzygium samarangense since it is the only species commercially planted on a large scale among the four important freshly consumed species. The introduction of the biology, production and postharvest technology of the present article are thus based primarily on Syzygium samarangense.
Mycorrhizosphere of fruit crops: Nature and properties

Jia-Dong He, ... Qiang-Sheng Wu, in Fruit Crops, 2020
3 Mycorrhizal fungal diversity in fruit crops
3.1 Fruit crops forming mycorrhizas

The mycorrhizal germplasm resources of horticultural plants are extremely abundant. According to incomplete statistics, there are more than 300 fruit trees known to be colonized by AMF: Actinidia chinensis, Anacardium occidentale, Ananas comosus, Aronia melanocarpa, Artocarpus heterophyllus, Averrhoa carambola, Carica papaya, Cerasus tomentosa, Chaenomelis fructus, Citrus, Cocos nucifera, Coffea arabica, Crataegus pinnatifida, Dimocarpus longan, Diospyros kaki, Eriobotrya japonica, Ficus carica, Fortunella, Fragaria ananassa, Ginkgo biloba, Hippophae rhamnoides, Juglans regia, Litchi chinensis, Lonicera edulis, Macadamia integrifolia, Malus komarovii, Malus pumila, Mangifera indica, Mangifera persiciforma, Morella rubra, Musa supientum, Olea europaea, Padus asiatica, Passiflora edulis, Persea americana, Phoenix dactylifera, Pistacia vera, Poncirus, Prunus armeniaca, Prunus avium, Prunus persica, Prunus salicina, Psidium guajava, Punica granatum, Pyrus bretschneideri, Ribes nigrum, Rosa roxburghii, Rubus allegheniensis, Rubus idaeus, Schisandra chinensis, Syzygium jambos, Theobroma cacao, Vitis amurensis, Vitis spp., Ziziphus jujuba, etc. (Wu, 2010).

In short, the berry fruit trees except the bilberry and cranberry belong to the ericoid mycorrhizal type, and the others are arbuscular mycorrhizal types. Nut fruit trees are arbuscular mycorrhizal plants except pecans, chestnuts, and hazelnuts, which belong to ectomycorrhizal fungi.
3.2 Mycorrhizal fungal diversity in fruit crops

The investigation of AMF resources in evergreen fruit crops can be traced back to the investigation of 79 citrus orchards and nurseries in California and 66 citrus orchards and nurseries in Florida in 1981 (Nemec et al., 1981). Meanwhile, Glomus fasciculatus, Glomus macrocarpus, Glomus etunicatus, Glomus constrictus, and Sclerocystis sinuosa were found in citrus orchards of California and Florida, and Glomus microcarpus and Glomus monosporus were found in citrus orchards of California. Gigaspora margarita and Glomus mosseae were also found in citrus orchards of Florida. An interesting result was that G. fasciculatus could generally coexist with young citrus trees (0–30 years), while G. constrictus coexisted with old trees (30–70 years).

The earliest investigation of AMF resources on deciduous fruit crops was done by Miller et al. (1985). They investigated apple rhizosphere in Arkansas, California, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin. And 9 apple rootstocks from 18 apple orchards (Malus domestica) were investigated for AMF diversity. A total of 43 species of AMF were found. Among them, 36 species were identified, namely, Acaulospora bireticulata, Acaulospora scrobiculata, Acaulospora spinosa, Gigaspora calospora, Gigaspora coralloidea, Gigaspora erythropa, Gigaspora gigantea, Gigaspora gilmorei, Gigaspora heterogama, G. margarita, Gigaspora pellucida, Gigaspora reticulata, Gigaspora rosea, Gigaspora verrucosa, Glomus albidum, Glomus bitunicatum, Glomus caledonium, Glomus constrictum, Glomus etunicatum, G. fasciculatum, Glomus fragile, Glomus geosporum, Glomus hyalosporum, Glomus invermaium, Glomus macrocarpum, Glomus maculosum, Glomus manihotis, Glomus melanosporum, Glomus microcarpum, Glomus monosporum, G. mosseae, Glomus occultum, Glomus stramentotinctum, Glomus versiforme, Sclerocystis rubiformis, and S. sinuosa. Seven species were not identified, including Acaulospora sp., Gigaspora sp., and Sclerocystis sp. and four Glomus sp. In addition, A. spinosa, G. coralloidea, G. erythropa, G. gilmorei, G. margarita, G. pellucida, G. reticulata, G. verrucosa, G. albidum, G. bitunicatum, G. caledonium, G. etunicatum, G. hyalosporum, G. invermaium, G. maculosum, G. manihotis, G. mosseae, G. occultum, Glomus sp. 2, G. stramentotinctum, and G. versiforme could successfully propagate in pots with apples and sorghum.

There are 18 kinds of AMF in rhizosphere of Troyer citrange orchards in India (Vinayak and Bagyaraj, 1990). They were G. fasciculatum (three different ecological species), G. mosseae (two different ecological species), G. albidum, G. macrocarpum, Glomus merredum, Glomus velum, G. monosporum, G. caledonium, G. calospora (two different ecological species), G. margarita (two different ecological species), Acaulospora sp., Acaulospora laevis, and Sclerocystis dussi.

In October 2001, Cheng and Baumgartner (2004) investigated the AMF diversity in 10 vineyards in northern California. A total of 19 species of AMF were found in rhizosphere. Among them, 16 identified species were Glomus aggregatum, Glomus claroideum, Glomus clarum, G. etunicatum, G. fasciculatum, Glomus fistulosum, G. geosporum, Glomus leptotichum, Glomus microaggregatum, G. mosseae, Glomus pulvinatum, Glomus scintillans, Glomus sinuosum, Glomus spurcum, Entrophospora infrequens, and Paraglomus occultum. In addition, there were three species of AMF that have not been identified, all of which belong to Glomus.

Ananthakrishnan et al. (2004) separated AMF species from five cashew nut plantations in Tamil Nadu, southern Indian. A total of 23 AMF resources were found, belonging to 4 genera, including 14 species of Glomus (G. aggregatum, G. clarum, G. constrictum, Glomus deserticola, G. fasciculatum, G. geosporum, Glomus intraradices, G. macrocarpum, G. microcarpum, G. mosseae, Glomus multisubstensum, G. occultum, Glomus radiatum, and G. scintillans), 4 species of Acaulospora (Acaulospora elegans, Acaulospora foveata, A. laevis, and Acaulospora morrowiae), 3 species of Gigaspora (Gigaspora candida, Gigaspora decipiens, and G. margarita), and 2 species of Scutellospora (Scutellospora calospora and Scutellospora nigra). Among them, Glomus is the most abundant, especially G. aggregatum, G. fasciculatum, and G. mosseae appeared most frequently in orchards.

There were 35 species of AMF resources in the rhizosphere of 14-year-old apple trees (M. domestica) in traditional and organic apple orchards in southwestern Brazil, of which 23 were identified as A. bireticulata, Acaulospora denticulata, A. foveata, A. laevis, Acaulospora mellea, A. morrowiae, Acaulospora rugosa, A. scrobiculata, A. spinosa, Acaulospora tuberculata, Archaeospora trappei, E. infrequens, Entrophospora kentinensis, G. claroideum, G. etunicatum, G. fasciculatum, G. geosporum, G. invermaium, G. mosseae, G. microaggregatum, G. spurcum, Paraglomus brasilianum, and P. occultum; 12 species were not identified, including 4 species from Acaulospora, 6 species from Glomus, 1 species from Gigaspora, and 1 species from Scutellospora (Purin et al., 2006).

Trindade et al. (2006) collected 67 soil samples from 47 papaya commercial orchards in the southwest of Salvador and north of San Espiritu, Brazil, to investigate the AMF resources. There were 24 AMF strains identified, including Acaulospora delicata, Acaulospora dilatata, Acaulospora longula, A. mellea, A. morrowiae, A. rugosa, A. scrobiculata, Entrophospora colombiana, P. brasilianum, P. occultum, G. etunicatum, G. intraradices, G. macrocarpum, G. mosseae, Glomus tortuosum, Scutellospora cerradensis, Scutellospora heterogama, Scutellospora pellucida, and Scutellospora persica. Four species were not identified, belonging to Gigaspora (one species), Glomus (one species), Acaulospora (one species), and Entrophospora (one species).

In a word, mycorrhizal fungal diversity in fruit crops is relatively abundant in mycorrhizosphere. It can provide superior AMF community in rhizosphere of fruit crops than nonmycorrhizosphere. As a result, mycorrhizosphere possesses more potential in improving tree growth and maintaining soil health of fruit crops.
7.1 Botanical description

S. cumini (synonym Eugenia jambola or Syzygium jambos or Eugenia cuminii) commonly known as Jambolão (Portuguese) or black plum or Jamun belongs to the Myrtaceae family. It is originated from India and Southeast Asia but is also widespread in Brazil. Their edible fruits are astringent to taste (Zhang & Lin, 2009), ovoid in shape, 2–3 cm long, the peel has a purple to black color, and the pulp has a grayish white color and presents a big purple seed (Gordon, Jungfer, da Silva, Maia, & Marx, 2011). The juice of unripe Jambolão is often used to prepare vinegar and the ripe fruits are used to produce preserves, squashes and jellies (Zhang & Lin, 2009). In folk medicine, this fruit has been used as anti-scorbutic, diuretic and for the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases (Benherlal & Arumughan, 2007; Gordon et al., 2011). Nevertheless, the main use of the Jambolão fruit relates to anti-diabetic features (Benherlal & Arumughan, 2007; Gordon et al., 2011; Teixeira et al., 1997; Teixeira et al., 2000).
Food Toxicology * Food Safety

Radu Claudiu Fierascu, ... Irina Fierascu, in Current Opinion in Food Science, 2018
In vivo evaluation of the antioxidant activity

Unlike the in vitro assays, the data regarding in vivo evaluation of the antioxidant potential are far less encountered. Meng et al. [42] published an extensive review paper regarding the application of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model for the in vivo determination of the antioxidant potential of several dietary phytochemicals. Nematodes (Caenorhabditis elegans worms) represent an appropriate organism model, due to their well-established genetic pathways, rapid life cycle and short lifespan. The in vivo determinations (including determination of survival rate and Reactive Oxygen Species - ROS concentration), combined with in vitro classical assays showed the antioxidant potential of lemon balm, spike lavender, oregano [36••], juniper berries [43] or Syzygium jambos L. (Alston) [44]. Daniel-Jambun et al. [45] demonstrated the antioxidant activity of Etlingera pubescens (B.L.Burtt & R.M.Sm.) R.M.Sm. using in vitro assays combined with a cell-based antioxidant assay (performed on human HaCaT cells). Wistar rats were successfully used in the in vivo evaluation of antioxidant and antihemototoxic properties of sumac and acorn extracts [46]. In vivo tests performed on African catfish (Clarias gariepinus (B.)) were used to determine the antioxidant effect of clove basil leaf extract, the results suggesting the potential use of the herb for improving the performance, health and immune response of fishes [47]. Coriander (a world-wide used herb) was recently reviewed by Prachayasittikul et al. [48] in terms of chemical composition and medicinal potential, including the in vivo demonstration of antioxidant potential of the extracts exhibited in mice and rats experiments.

The main tests used for the in vitro evaluation of the antioxidant potential, as well as the most encountered in vivo animal models are presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2