ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITY OF SYZYGIUM JAMBOS AGAINST SELECTED HUMAN PATHOGENS

ABSTRACT
The aim of this study is to evaluate the antimicrobial efficacy of Syzygium jambos (L) Alston (Myrtaceae) against eight different microorganisms
such as Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella typhi
and Vibrio cholera. S. jambos is a widespread medicinal plant traditionally used in India to treat infectious diseases. Aqueous and acetone extracts of
bark, leaves and seeds of S. jambos were tested for antimicrobial activity in vitro by the agar well diffusion method in petri dishes. Both extracts
showed some activity against the tested microorganisms. Among the three different parts, aqueous extracts of bark have exhibited a minimum
inhibitory effect against S. aureus, E. coli and S. typhi, whereas seeds inhibited the growth of P. aeruginosa and V. cholerae, and leaves exhibited
inhibitory effect only against S. typhi. Among the acetone extracts, bark was found to be effective against all the test microorganisms, leaves
inhibited only S. aureus, whereas seed extracts failed to exhibit any inhibitory effect against the test organisms. These properties seem to be related
to the high tannin content of S. jambos in bark (2.5 mg/ml) than seeds (1.9 mg/ml) and leaves (1.4 mg/ml). Overall the acetone extract of bark was
found to be more effective. The results of the extracts were compared with the standard antibiotics ampicillin, streptomycin and tetracycline.
Keywords: Syzygium jambos, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Antibiotics, Ampicillin, Streptomycin
INTRODUCTION
Infectious diseases account for high proportion of health problems
in the developing countries like India. Microorganism has developed
resistance to many antibiotics and this has created immense clinical
problem in the treatment of infectious diseases. The resistance of
the organism increased due to the indiscriminate use of commercial
antimicrobial drugs commonly used for the treatment of infectious
diseases. This situation forced the scientist to search for new
antimicrobial substances from various sources including medicinal
plants 1. Many of the plants used today were known to the people of
ancient culture throughout the world for their preservative and
medicinal powers 2 . However several plants are used in India in the
form of crude extracts, infusions or plaster to treat common
infections without scientific evidence of efficacy 3 .
Natural products of plant origin have played significant role in the
search of therapeutic drugs such as quinine from cinchone 4. Search
for new antimicrobials is very important in recent time considering
the escalating levels of antibiotic resistance among pathogenic
bacteria 5, 6. Many more herbal ingredients are present over the
counter drugs such as laxatives. Medicines that come from plants
include aspirin from willow bark. Tannin content present in some
plants has the ability to act against the microorganisms such as
S. aureus, Salmonella species, E. coli, Pseudomonas species and so on.
Tannin is a general descriptive name for a group of polymeric
phenolic substances capable of tanning leather, or precipitating
gelatin from solution, a property known as astringency. According to
Scalbert, tannin can be toxic to filamentous fungi, yeast and bacteria.
Condensed tannins have been determined to bind cell walls of
ruminal bacteria 7 .
Syzygium jambos (L) Alston (Eugenia jambos) is widespread in sub‐
Saharan Africa (Benin, Democratic Republic of Congo and
Cameroon) where its bark is traditionally used to treat infectious
diseases 8, 9. It is also distributed in Reunion Island, Central America
(Guatemala) and Asia (Malaysia, Nepal) where fruits are eaten 10.
Besides studies on the fruit volatiles and sugars 11, the only part of
the plant chemico‐pharmacologically studied was the leaves.
Aqueous, methanol, and ethyl acetate extracts of S. jambos leaves
from Guatemala have been shown to posses anti‐inflammatory
activity in adjuvant carrageenan induced inflammation model in rats
12. S. jambos may be merely a shrub but is generally a tree reaching
7.5‐12 m in height and has a dense crown of slender, wide spreading
branches. In India, the fruit is regarded as a tonic for the brain and
liver. An infusion of the fruit acts as a diuretic and sweetened
preparation of the flowers is believed to reduce fever. The seeds are
employed against diarrhea, dysentery and catarrh. In Nicaragua, it
has been claimed that an infusion of roasted, powdered seeds is
beneficial to diabetics 13.
In spite of the use of bark of this plant to treat infectious diseases, no
investigation was made on comparison of tannin content of the bark,
leaves and seeds and their antibacterial properties. Thus we decided
to investigate the antimicrobial properties of aqueous and acetone
extracts of bark, leaves and seeds of S. jambos. Hence the present
study was undertaken in the Post Graduate and Research
Department of Microbiology, Dr.N.G.P Arts and Science College,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India to evaluate the efficacy of
antimicrobial activity of barks, leaves and seeds of S. jambos. The
efficacy was compared with the standard antibiotics and the results
were discussed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant materials
Plant parts such as barks, leaves and seeds of S. jambos were
collected from Kannur (Panoor), Kerala, India. Plant materials were
dried under the shadow. The dried materials were fine powdered
and stored in polythene bags at room temperature (30±2ºC) until
use.
Chemicals
All chemicals used were of analytical grade and purchased from
typical chemical companies.
Extract preparations
Aqueous extract
To obtain the aqueous extracts, dried and finely powdered bark,
leaves and seeds of S. jambos were weighed about 30 grams each
and homogenized using 150ml of water. They were added to Soxhlet
apparatus and the boiling point of water was set up at 100ºC. The
water evaporates continuously and was recycled, thereby extracting
the compounds present in the samples. They were continuously
extracted until the solution looses the colour.
Acetone extract
To obtain the solvent extracts, dried and finely powdered bark,
leaves and seeds of S. jambos were weighed about 30 grams each
and homogenized using 150ml of 70% acetone. They were added to
International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
ISSN- 0975-1491 Vol 3, Issue 2, 2011
Chavhan et al.
Int J Pharm Pharm Sci, Vol 3, Issue 2, 2011, 44 47
45
Soxhlet apparatus and the boiling point of acetone was set up at
56.6ºC. The solvent was recycled, thereby extracting the compounds
present in the samples. They were continuously extracted until the
solvent looses its colour. The extract was then transferred to a
sterile petridish and kept for evaporation of acetone at room
temperature. Residues of extracts were collected and stored in the
refrigerator.
Microorganisms used and their growth conditions
The test organisms included the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella typhi and Vibrio
cholerae were obtained from Microbiology divisions of Kovai
Medical Center and Hospital (KMCH), a 500 bed multi‐speciality
hospital, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India. The bacteria were grown in
nutrient broth at 37°C and maintained on nutrient agar slants at 4°C.
Antibacterial activity of plant extracts: Well diffusion method
Antibacterial activity of the aqueous and acetone extracts of barks,
leaves and seeds of S. jambos were tested using well diffusion
method. A loop full of culture was inoculated into peptone broth and
incubated for 2 to 6 hours at 35°C until it achieved the turbidity of
0.5 McFarland’s standard. The test cultures were swabbed on
nutrient agar plates, within 15 minutes after adjusting the turbidity
of the inoculum suspension. The swab was rotated several times and
pressed firmly on the inside wall of the tube above the fluid level.
This removed the excess inoculum from the swab. The dried surface
of a nutrient agar plate was inoculated by streaking the swab and
the entire sterile agar surface. This procedure was repeated by
streaking two more times, rotating the plate approximately 60° each
time to ensure an even distribution of inoculum. As a final step, the
rim of the agar was swabbed and wells were made using the sterile
well puncture. Different concentrations (60μg to 100μg) of the
sterile aqueous and acetone extracts were added to each well. The
plates were incubated in an upright position at 37°C for 24 hours.
The diameter of inhibition zones were measured in mm and the
results are recorded.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In traditional medicine, people usually use aqueous decoctions to
treat patients. That is why we first prepared the extract from an
aqueous decoction. Preliminary phytochemical analysis of these
extract by calorimetric reaction showed that tannins were the major
compounds. Because of the presence of tannins, an extract was
prepared with acetone 70%, a better solvent for tannin 14. These
extracts were tested on a panel of Gram positive and negative
bacteria. The antibacterial activity of aqueous and acetone extracts
of different parts (bark, leaves and seeds) of S. jambos are presented
in table 1 and 2. Similarly, the zones of inhibition exhibited by
standard antibiotics (ampicillin, streptomycin and tetracycline)
were depicted in table 3.
When the aqueous extracts of bark, leaf and seed were tested against
the test microorganisms, bark extracts have exhibited greater
inhibitory effect against S. aureus, and E. coli than the leaves and
seeds, showing an inhibitory zone of 15mm. However, the aqueous
extracts of bark, leaf and seed did not show any antibacterial activity
against B. subtilis, K. pneumoniae and P. vulgaris. In the case of P.
aeruginosa, seed extracts possessed anti‐bacterial activity but barks
and leaves did not show any activity. Both the bark and leaf extracts
exhibited inhibitory effect against S. typhi, but no activity was
observed in seed extracts. The aqueous seed extracts showed a
stronger activity (17mm) against V. cholerae. When compared to the
standard antibiotics such as streptomycin and tetracycline, seed
extract had greater effect. Thus the aqueous extracts of bark, leaf
and seed showed a varying degree of effectiveness against the tested
microorganisms.
The acetone extracts of bark, leaf and seed of S. jambos, when tested
have exhibited different degrees of antibacterial activity against test
microorganisms. Among them, barks of S. jambos were found to be
effective against all test microorganisms with inhibition zones
ranging from 9 to 17 mm. When these results were compared with
standard antibiotics, it was found that acetone extract is more
effective than the streptomycin, ampicillin and tetracycline against S.
aureus. When the acetone extract of leaves tested against S. aureus, 9
mm zone of inhibition was observed, but no zone of inhibition was
observed in seed extracts.
It is also clear from the table‐ 2, that the bark extracts of S. jambos
has exhibited antibacterial activity against E. coli showing 17 mm
zone of inhibition. This extract is more effective when compared to
standard antibiotics ampicillin and tetracycline and have equal effect
to streptomycin. In the case of B. subtilis, the acetone bark extract
have exhibited a zone inhibition of 16 mm were same when
compared to the standard antibiotics and the extracts were found to
be more effective. Similarly, the acetone bark extracts were highly
effective against K. pneumoniae, when compared to standard
antibiotics.
When P. vulgaris tested against the standard antibiotics, no zone of
inhibition was observed for tetracycline, 20 and 9 mm for ampicillin
and streptomycin respectively, but the extract showed 12 mm zone
of inhibition which was found to be more active than streptomycin.
P. aeruginosa when tested against standard antibiotics, no zone of
inhibition was observed for ampicillin and tetracycline and 10 mm
for streptomycin, whereas the bark extract showed a zone inhibition
of 15 mm, which is more active than streptomycin.
When the acetone extracts of bark, leaf and seed of S. jambos tested
against S. typhi, bark extracts were more effective when compared to
leaves and seeds. 12 mm zone of inhibition was noticed for acetone
bark extract, where as the leaves and seeds showed no inhibitory
effect. When compared with the standard antibiotics, the bark
extract is less active than the standard antibiotics. The acetone
extract of bark exhibited a zone of inhibition of 15 mm against V.
cholerae, which is more effective when compared to the standard
antibiotic streptomycin.
The acetone extracts of leaves and seeds tested against E. coli, B.
subtilis, K. pneumoniae, P. vulgaris, P. aeruginosa and S. typhi, showed
no significant zone of inhibition. It is clearly evident that the bark
extract had exhibited stronger antibacterial activity than seed and
leaf extracts. This may be due to the higher tannin content (2.5
mg/ml) present in bark than seeds (1.9 mg/ml) and leaves (1.4
mg/ml). The bark of Syzygium guinease with which, it is often
confused to treat pernicious attack, amenorrhea, abdominal pain
and diarrhea 8, 9.
The acetone extracts of leaves failed to show any activity against the
tested microorganisms, but the aqueous extract of leaves showed
antibacterial activity only against S. typhi. An infusion of S. jambos
leaves has been tested for anti‐diabetic activity by glucose tolerance
test in a randomized, parallel, double blind clinical trial in non‐
diabetic subjects, but no significant effect was detected 15.
Ethanol extracts of S. jambos leaves possessed antiviral activity on
Herpes Simplex type I and inhibited the replication of vesicular
stomatitis virus but had no effect on polio virus replication 16 . But in
the present study, leaves showed an antibacterial activity only
against S. aureus and S. typhi. Similarly seeds exhibited antibacterial
activity only against P. aeruginosa and V. cholerae.
The test organisms S. aureus and P. aeruginosa, included in the study
were isolated from diabetic foot ulcer patients and they were
strongly inhibited by barks of S. jambos. So bark extracts/powders
can be used to treat diabetes patients with foot ulcers to prevent
amputation. The other organisms included in the study were
isolated from clinical specimens and this clearly indicates that the
bark, leaves and seeds could be attributed to the treatment of
diseases caused by the test microorganisms.
On comparing the aqueous and acetone extracts of bark, seed and
leaf of S. jambos, it is confirmed that the acetone extracts are more
active than the aqueous. Djipa et al. also reported that small
differences are observed with some strains where the acetone
extract is often more active than the aqueous one 13. The results of
the present study are in accordance with earlier findings.
This limelight’s that the organic solvent acetone has the ability to
extract the active phytochemicals present in the plant parts. Among
Chavhan et al.
Int J Pharm Pharm Sci, Vol 3, Issue 2, 2011, 44 47
46
the different parts studied, the effectiveness of these parts are in the
ranking order; highest by bark, followed by seeds and leaves which
are intermediate in their action because they could show inhibitory
action only against few microorganisms like S. typhi and V. cholerae,
where as the bark exhibited inhibitory effect against all the tested
microorganisms.
Tannins are well known to possess general antimicrobial
properties 6 . Tannins are quite resistant to microbial attack and
are known to inhibit the growth of some microorganisms. It is
this antimicrobial effect of tannins that slow down the rate of
biodegradation of soil organic matter. However, Deschamps et al.
have found a number of bacteria, fungi and yeast that are
resistant to tannin 17 .
The study indicates that even though both extracts do not possess
the same antibacterial spectrum, the observed activities seem to be
generally related to the total tannin content. This also shows that
strains do not seem to have the same sensitivity to the tannins
present in the bark, leaf and seed extracts and that the antibacterial
properties of S. jambos extracts can probably be explained by the
presence of high concentration of antimicrobial tannins. It is evident
from the present study that the extracts of S. jambos were active
against the test microorganisms. Further more phytochemical
studies are required to determine the type of compounds
responsible for the antimicrobial effect of the plant and toxicity tests
can be carried out before the drug development process using barks
of S. jambos. In addition, the results support the use of this plant in
traditional medicine for the treatment of infections.
Table 1: Therapeutic use of the medicinal plant Syzygium jambos
Scientific name Local name Family Parts used Infection / Therapeutic use
Syzygium jambos Rose apple Myrtaceae Bark Epilepsy, asthma, bronchitis, hoarseness
Leaves Sore eyes, diuretic rheumatism, powdered leaves rubbed on bodies of
small pox patients
Seed Diarrhea, dysentery, catarrh, anesthetic property, diabetic
Table 2: Antimicrobial activity of aqueous extracts of S. jambos
Microorganisms Zone of inhibition (mm)
Bark (μg/ml) Leaf (μg/ml) Seed (μg/ml)
60 70 80 90 100 60 70 80 90 100 60 70 80 90 100
S. aureus 7 7 8 9 9 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
B. subtilis ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
E. coli 6 6 9 9 11 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
K. pneumoniae ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
P. vulgaris ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
P. aeruginosa ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ 9 9 11 11 11
S. typhi 8 8 8 9 11 7 7 9 10 10 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
V. cholera ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ 14 14 14 17 17
‘‐‘– No significant zone of inhibition
Table 3: Antimicrobial activity of acetone extracts of S. jambos
Microorganisms
Zone of inhibition (mm)
Bark (μg/ml) Leaf (μg/ml) Seed (μg/ml)
60 70 80 90 100 60 70 80 90 100 60 70 80 90 100
S. aureus 12 12 12 13 13 7 7 9 9 9 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
B. subtilis 12 14 15 16 16 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
E. coli 14 14 16 17 17 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
K. pneumoniae 12 13 13 14 15 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
P. vulgaris 9 9 11 11 12 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
P. aeruginosa 12 12 13 14 15 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
S. typhi 9 9 11 12 12 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
V. cholera 12 13 14 14 15 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
‘‐‘– No significant zone of inhibition
Table 4: Antimicrobial activity of standard antibiotics
Microorganisms Antibiotics / Zone of inhibition (mm)
Streptomycin Ampicillin Tetracycline
S. aureus 10 8 12
B. subtilis 13 10 13
E. coli 17 10 15
K. pneumoniae 10 12 13
P. vulgaris 9 20 ‐
P. aeruginosa 10 ‐ ‐
S. typhi 13 13 17
V. cholera 10 20 16
‘‐’ ‐ No significant zone of inhibition
REFERENCES
1. Sashikumar JM, Remya M and Janardhanan K, Antimicrobial
activity of ethanol medicinal plants of Nilgiri Bioshpere reserve
and Western Ghats. Asian J Microbial Biotechnol 2003; 5:183‐
185.
2. Zaika LI, Spices and Herbs, their antimicrobial activity and its
determination. J Food Safety 1975; 9:97‐118.
3. Ahmad I, Mehmood Z and Mohammad F, Screening of some
Indian medicinal plants for their antimicrobial properties. J
Ethanopharmacol 1998; 62:183‐193.
Chavhan et al.
Int J Pharm Pharm Sci, Vol 3, Issue 2, 2011, 44 47
47
4. Hora SL, and Nair KK, Pollution of streams and conservation of
fisheries. Proc Natt Inst Sci India 1944; 10: 147‐166.
5. Hatha AAM, and Lakshmanaperumalsamy P, Antibiotic
resistance of Salmonella strains from marketed fish and
crustaceans. Lett Appl Microbiol 1995; 24: 47‐49.
6. Srinivasan D, Sangeetha N, Suresh T and
Lakshmanaperumalsamy P, Antimicrobial activity of certain
Indian Medicinal Plants used in folkloric medicine. J
Ethanopharamacol 2001; 74: 217‐220.
7. Scalbert A, Antimicrobial properties of tannins.
Phytochemistry, 1991;30(12): 3875‐3883.
8. Adjanohoun EJ, Contribution aux e ́tudes ethnobotaniques et
floristiques en Re ́publique Populaire du Congo. Me ́de ́cine
traditionnelle et pharmacope ́e. Agence de coope ́ration
culturelle et technique. France 1988.
9. Adjanohoun EJ, Contribution aux e ́tudes ethnobotaniques et
floristiques en Re ́publique Populaire du Be ́nin. Me ́de ́cine
traditionnelle et pharmacope ́e. Agence de. France 1989.
10. Maskey K, and Shah BB, Sugars in some Nepalese edible wild
fruits. J Nepal Chemical Society 1982; 2:23–30.
11. Wong KC, and Lai FY, Volatile constituents from the fruits of
four Syzygium species grown in Malaysia. Flavour and
Fragrance 1996; 11 (1): 61–66.
12. Slowing K, Carretero E and Villar A, Anti inflammatory activity
of leaf extracts of Eugenia jambos on rats. J Ethanopharmacol
1994; 43:9‐11.
13. Djipa CD, Delmee M and Quetin‐Leclercq J, Antimicrobial
activity of bark extracts of Syzygium jambos (L) Alston
(Myrtaceae). J Ethanopharmacol 2000; l71: 307‐313.
14. Bruneton J, Pharmacognosie Phytochimie Plantes me ́dicinales.
Editions Lavoisier, Paris, pp. 323–325.coope ́ration culturelle
et technique. France 1993.
15. Teixeira CC, Fuchs FD and Blotta RM, Effect of tea prepared
from leaves of Syzygium jambos on glucose tolerance in non‐
diabetic subjects. Diabetes Care 1990; 13(8): 907‐908.
16. Abad MJ, Bermejo P and Villar A, Antiviral activity of medicinal
plant extracts. Phytotherapy Research 1997; 11:198‐202.
17. Deschamps AM, Otuk G and Lebeault JM, Production of Tannase
and degradation of chestnut tannins by bacteria. J Ferment
Technol 1983; 61: 55 – 59.
