Syzygium jambos: Facts, how to grow and care, and uses

The Jambos tree is an evergreen that can reach heights of six to ten metres and has a regular-shaped, dense crown of branches that spread widely. It is a versatile tree that has been grown for around 2,500 years. It offers the local populace a variety of goods, including food, medicine, and other necessities.

It is a pretty tree that is frequently planted as an ornamental and hedge plant in tropical gardens. It has spectacular cream-coloured flowers and dark-green foliage.
AdPushup
Report this ad

 
Syzygium jambos: Quick facts 
Habit 	Evergreen tree
Height 	8.00 m
Growth Rate 	Medium
Pollinators 	Bees, Insects, Self
Self-fertile 	Yes
Cultivation Status 	Cultivated, Ornamental, Wild

Syzygium jambos: Facts, how to grow and care, uses, and can you grow it indoors

Source: Pinterest

 
How to grow Syzygium jambos?

A rose apple tree can be grown from seed, cuttings, grafting, and air layering. The majority of people either purchase live rose apple trees or grow them from an already established plant because seeds don’t keep well and quickly lose their viability.

    High-quality potting mix should be poured into 1-gallon pots. One cutting will fit within each container. Because not all cuts will heal, take many at once.
    A robust rose apple tree should yield several branches that are 4 to 6 inches long. Verify that the branches are not overly seasoned and woody.
    They ought to have some new growth and be somewhat green.
    Using a clean, sharp knife, cut the branches at a 45-degree angle from the main plant.
    Put one cutting in each pot before watering them.
    Keep the soil moist but not waterlogged as they grow. Keep your cuttings at 75°F or above and in dappled shade.
    Your pruning may not take root for six months or longer.
    Your branch will show signs of fresh growth when the cutting is successful.

 
How to care for Syzygium jambos? 
Light

Although Rose apples can tolerate full sun, for optimum results, plant them where they will receive dappled shade in the afternoon when the sun is at its heaviest.
Water

Rose apple trees require a modest quantity of water and are not drought-tolerant like the majority of tropical plants. If you mulch, make sure to leave a space of a few inches between the tree trunk and the mulch, so it does not become wet.
Soil

Rose apples don’t have particular soil preferences, but they do prefer a pH range of 5.5 to 7.0. Although fertile and loamy soil is ideal, they can also thrive on sand or clay. It’s more crucial to keep your rose apple tree warm and moist than the environment you grow it in.
Fertiliser

Utilise an organic fertiliser to fertilise your rose apples three times a year.

 
Uses of Syzygium jambos
Edible

Fruit is typically consumed raw, although it can also be stewed, turned into jams, jellies, desserts, etc. The fruit has a delicate, rose-water scent and a sweet flavour with a crisp and crunchy texture. It can also range from being slightly to very juicy. They add a rose-like flavour to custards or puddings when cooked. The big, hollow seed chamber of the fruit is occasionally used to stuff and bake the fruit. After harvesting, the fruit needs to be handled gently because it easily bruises and loses its crispness. Children typically devour the fruit out of hand in tropical regions. It is rarely advertised. It is occasionally cooked with some sugar and served as dessert in the home.

Syzygium jambos: Facts, how to grow and care, uses, and can you grow it indoors

Source: Pinterest
Medicinal

    Given its non-toxicity, the tree’s various parts are utilised as tonics in medicine.
    The fruit is revered as a liver and brain tonic in India. The fruit works as a diuretic when infused.
    It is thought that a sweetened floral mixture can lessen fever.
    The seeds are used to treat catarrh, dysentery, and diarrhoea.
    It has been reported that diabetics in Nicaragua benefit from an infusion of roasted, powdered seeds. The seeds are said to have anaesthetic properties in Colombia. It is emetic, astringent, and cathartic.
    The decoction is used to treat hoarseness, bronchitis, and asthma. The root is said to be a successful treatment for epilepsy by the Cuban people.

 
Is Syzygium jambo an indoor plant?

Yes. Rose apple trees can be grown indoors in containers. You can bring a rose apple tree indoors for the winter if you grow it in a container. Rose apples should be planted in a pot that is at least 5 gallons in size, and all drainage holes should be drilled out.

