Uses Of Tulsi (Holy Basil): Benefits and Supplements

Tulsi is called the queen of all herbs, it is used widely in Ayurvedic and naturopathic medicines which helps in the healing of the human body in a natural manner. Not only do Tulsi leaves benefit people, but their flowers too. Tulsi can help you get rid of many health problems ranging from fever to kidney stones. Ayurvedic texts have also categorised the wonder herb as a stimulant, antipyretic and aromatic in nature.

In the Hindu religion, holy basil is both a religious symbol as well as a good medical remedy. Religiously speaking, holy basil is worshipped in the mornings and evenings by Hindus throughout India and medically speaking it is used to treat common ailments in the ancient Ayurvedic healthcare system.

What is Tulsi?
Tulsi also referred to as Ocimum sanctum or Holy Basil, is a medicinal herb that belongs to the mint family and is found in 150 different varieties worldwide. It emits a sort of spicy scent when applied to a wound and this is the reason why it is called the wonder herb. It usually has a bitter taste and its roots, leaves and seeds consist of several medicinal properties.

Did you ever know that tulsi tea aids in quick weight loss and reduces anxiety disorder? It is also used as a herb to treat thyroid and  diabetes. Just as powerful as the tulsi flowers, its leaves are also equally powerful. Tulsi leaves can be added to hot water and it will help you when you are steaming to get rid of a bad cold or sinus.

Nutritional Chart of Tulsi (Holy Basil)
Content in a 100g serving	Percentage of Recommended Daily Intake
Calories	22	
Total fats	0.6 g	0%
Saturated fats	0 g	0%
Cholesterol	0 g	0%
Total Carbohydrates	2.7 g	
Dietary fibre	1.6 g	6%
Sugars	0.3 g	
Protein	3.2 g	6%
Sodium	4 mg	0%
Potassium	295 mg	8%
Iron		17%
Magnesium		16%
Calcium		17%
Vitamin C		30%
Vitamin B6		10%
Types of Tulsi:
There are three different types of tulsi or holy basil namely.

1. Rama Tulsi:
Rama Tulsi is also called green leaf tulsi and this is a different type of tulsi breed that has light purple flowers and has a clove-like scent to it. It consists of eugenol which is usually found in cloves and has a mellow flavour.

2. Krishna Tulsi:
This type of Tulsi is also called purple leaf tulsi and has a clove-like aroma. It tastes like pepper in your mouth. This type of tulsi helps cure infections such as throat infections, respiratory problems, earaches and skin diseases. The oil from Krishna Tulsi is used as ear drops. It is also used to cure malaria, indigestion, insomnia and cholera.
3. Vana Tulsi:
Vana Tulsi is a native to India, Sri Lanka, and Northeastern parts of Africa. This type of tulsi is usually grown for medicinal purposes and it is imbibed into Indian religious beliefs. This type must be protected from freezing and will grow in conditions that have full sun and dry areas. It has light green leaves that are accompanied by a lemony aroma and flavour. Vana Tulsi leaves increases immunity and this is usually used for preparing tea. When consumed in the form of tea, it provides health benefits such as increased physical and mental endurance and adds more oxygen and nutrients to your bloodstream.

Benefits of Using Tulsi:
Western medicine gives you instant relief but comes with a lot of side effects. Holy basil or Tulsi offers slow relief but you can be sure that there are no side effects and that is the reason why it is called the wonder herb. A single Tulsi plant can help you get rid of many health issues such as.

1. Tulsi for Skin:
Tulsi is proven to be the safest skin cream that can be used and the benefits are massive. Tulsi reflects on your skin when you consume it as well as applied. This wonder herb is used to treat acne, skin infections, lighten dark spots and improve skin texture. Here is a list of benefits that tulsi does to your skin.

Tulsi helps in skin brightening.
Tulsi helps in curing acne face marks.
Tulsi mixed with eggs and mixed can help in tightening skin pores.
Tulsi helps in curing skin infections and any sort of skin allergies.
2. Tulsi for Hair:
Holy Basil can be applied to your hair for multiple reasons and all that it does is it makes your hair look better in all ways. Here are some of the ways in which tulsi can benefit your hair.

Tulsi can help prevent hair fall.
Tulsi can reduce greying of the hair and keep it thick and black.
Tulsi can reduce dandruff.
Tulsi can help prevent dry scalp.
3. Tulsi for Weight Loss:
Tulsi is a natural ingredient that aids weight loss. If you’re wondering how to burn fat in a quick way without any side effects, then you need to opt for drinking tulsi tea. Two cups a day will make a difference. Also, you need to keep in mind that drinking tulsi tea will act more efficiently only if you work out. Of course without exercising tulsi tea can slim you down, but exercising will make the process faster.  Here are some ways in which tulsi can help you lose weight.

Tulsi tea controls your metabolism and helps your body absorb essential nutrients.
Tulsi tea helps boost your digestive system which is important for losing weight quickly.
Tulsi tea has zero calories that boost your stamina.
4. Tulsi for Eyes:
Your eyes are prone to a lot of dust and pollution every day. Thus most people develop eye-related problems and Tulsi acts as an immediate cure for eye-related problems such as:

Tulsi soothes the eyes.
Tulsi leaves left in boiled water overnight can be used to wash your eyes.
Tulsi eyewash can also reduce strain on your eyes.
Most importantly, it reduces the strain on your eyes and makes them feel relaxed. Tulsi eyewash can also help you prevent many other eye-related problems such as conjunctivitis and boils.

5. Tulsi Prevents Premature Ageing:
Vitamin C & A and phytonutrients are essential oils that are found in Tulsi, which are used as excellent antioxidants that protect the body from premature ageing. If herbal tea is said to make you feel and look young, imagine what Tulsi can do. Consuming 2 cups of Tulsi tea can help you look younger and prevent premature ageing.

6. Tulsi To Quit Smoking:
Tulsi leaves help fight cancer and prevents it from attacking you. The best aid to stop smoking is by munching tulsi leaves and this help get the nicotine content off your body. It helps in the purification of blood. Here are some ways in which tulsi can help you stop smoking.

Every time you get the urge to smoke, chew Tulsi leaves.
Make it a point to drink tulsi tea.
Tulsi can definitely help you stop smoking, provided you learn ways to deviate and curtail yourself from going against the urge. It’s all in your mind and the power of becoming a deviant from the habit is the 1st step to change the habit.

Medical Use of Tulsi:
Tulsi is called the wonder herb or sometimes the holy herb because of its medicinal properties. There are many diseases that can affect people again after it has left the person. But with the consumption of Tulsi, you can be sure that these diseases cannot affect you. Here are some of the ways in which tulsi can sort out various medical problems.

Tulsi can help cure fever.
Tulsi leaves are used to treat skin problems like acne, blackheads and premature ageing.
Tulsi is used to treat insect bites.
Tulsi is also used to treat  heart disease  and fever.
Tulsi is also used to treat respiratory problems.
Tulsi is used to cure fever, common cold and sore throat, headaches and kidney stones.
Tulsi helps in treating  Asthma.
Additional Benefits of Tulsi	
Digestive Tract	Tulsi is used as a remedy for a range of gastrointestinal diseases as well as to improve appetite
Diabetes	Tulsi may help to support a diet that is focused on reducing blood sugar
Oral Health	Herbal Tulsi has been added to a variety of oral products like toothpaste due to its teeth and gum strengthening properties. It can also be used by itself to help with mouth ulcers.
Anti-inflammatory	Due to its various plant compounds, tulsi helps to reduce inflammation and may be useful in easing stress and lowering blood pressure.
In simple terms, Tulsi is the best natural painkiller and solution to many of your health problems. It can be called the ancient healer of all diseases. It helps generate healthy mother milk during lactation.

Where to Get Tulsi Supplement?
Tulsi, the queen of herbs can be bought from a market near you, but again most of it may not be 100% organic. This is because farmers grow tulsi on soil that may have pre-existing chemicals in it. So, now that tulsi is grown on such chemical soil, is it organic or herbal. This herb is said to produce benefits and no side effects. But if it is grown on soil that’s containing chemicals, what guarantee is there that you won’t develop any side effects.

Our air is filled with a lot of toxins and this can cause cold, cough and fever. The answer to this is Tulsi. We at Medlife have created a 100% herbal tulsi in the form of a tablet that can bid goodbye to your common cold, cough and fever.

Benefits of Tulsi Tablet:
Tulsi tablet consists of Tulsi extract and Tulsi powder taken from the Tulsi leaf that helps in treating the common cold, allergic rhinitis, cough and many other respiratory tract diseases. Tulsi also helps in treating cold-related problems such as sneezing and running nose. Medlife has taken this holy herb and turned it into a pill that can solve all of these problems. Here are some benefits of Tulsi Tablet that be helpful for you.

Tulsi tablet can treat the common cold.
Tulsi tablet helps soothe your throat and cleans your respiratory tract.
Protects you from respiratory tract infections.
Helps in managing stress.
How to Consume Tulsi Tablet?
Tulsi tablet can be taken two times a day but they must be prescribed by a physician. Say no to side effects by taking the Tulsi tablet. Why worry when you can get a 100% organic herb in the form of a pill. This saves you the time of going to the market and buying the herb and boiling it in water and consuming it. All of this has been compressed in the form of a pill that can battle your cold, cough and other respiratory-related infections.

Well, if you are suffering from a bad cold or a cough, then the Tulsi tablet can work well for you. You can confidently pop the pill as there are 0% side effects from it. Currently, most people all over the world are understanding the working ways of this wonder herb and its effects on people. This is challenging western medicine as it has zero side effects to its use. So, live healthily and bid goodbye to that horrible cold or a cough that you’re struggling with.

FAQs
Who should avoid taking Tulsi?
Tulsi is known to have blood-thinning properties and it should not be taken by people who are already on anti-clotting medications. You must inform the doctor about your health condition and the medications you take so that he or she can guide you well.

How long does holy basil take to show positive results?
You may not see the results immediately after taking holy basil but you will notice improvements after a week. It may take a little more time to show good results in some people. If you are taking holy basil to treat anxiety, stress and depression, expect to see improvements after 60 days of treatment.

Can you take holy basil on an empty stomach?
Yes, taking holy basil on an empty stomach can contribute to amplifying its goodness. Tulsi is an integral part of Ayurveda, and it has multiple benefits when consumed in the right way for the right effects.

Disclaimer: The information included at this site is for educational purposes only and is not intended to be a substitute for medical treatment by a healthcare professional. Because of unique individual needs, the reader should consult their physician to determine the appropriateness of the information for the reader’s situation.

