An overview of Tulsi (Holy basil)

Abstract : Tulsi ( Ocimum sanctum) member of family ( Lamiaceae) is the most
significant medicinal plants mentioned in Ayurvedic creative writing for its
medicinal and religious properties. The root, seeds, and leaves are majorly used due to
its therapeutically properties. Tulsi, beside with other health profit is known to have
antibiotic properties. Hence, “antiviral activity” of aqueous/ ethanol/ methanol and
chloroform extract of powdered drugs was investigated against reasonably important
viruses of “veterinary importance”, Single stranded RNA virus. As per Ayurvedic
literatures tulsi is mentioned under Helminthiasis because it is an anti-microbial agent.
The uses of this plant on a daily basis are a witness to Ayurvedic intelligence and
provide an pattern of earliest information contribution solutions to present trouble. It
have also be exposed to respond to metabolic-stress by homogenize of blood sugar,
blood pressure, Cholesterol, and mental state through encouraging result on
remembrance and perception act and by its anxio-lytic and edronax effect. This drug is
a famous for house hold medication for many diseases such as injury, respiratory
disorders, hepatic disease, viral infection, earache, back pain, hiccup, inflammation of
the conjunctiva in newborns, stomach diseases, urinary disorders, seborrhea disease, a
variety of toxicity and mental stress. In the present studies literature review is
mentioned along with its Morphology, Phytochemistry, Pharmacognoctiscal studies and
various pharmacological activities and mainly anti-viral activity.
Keywords: Ocimum sanctum, Antiviral activity, Phytochemistry, Pharmacognostical &
Pharmacological aspect and traditional uses.
1. INTRODUCTION
Ocimum sanctum is a significant sign of the brahminic spiritual ritual. While the term “Tulsi”
tells the suggestion of the unparalleled one. Additional name, “Vishnupriya” expresses the
one that delight Lord Vishnu. Cultivated in maximum of Indian houses and temples, its
marvel has saturated our native society down the ages. In English it is called as Holy Basil
and it’s botanical name is Ocimum sanctum and it’s family is Lamiaceae. Tulsi classified
into two types- forestland and cultivated land. While having selfsame usage, it has dark
coloured leafs. Tulsi is widely used in home remedy for for treatment of injury, respiratory
disorders, hepatic disorders, viral infection, earache, spinal pain, hiccup, inflammation of the
conjunctiva in newborns [1,2]. It also have ambrosial, appetiser, helps to relieving flatulence,
helps to cure mucus irritation, inducing perspiration, diuretic, expectorator, alexiteric,
anthelmintic and antipyretic properties [3]. Tulsi is maybe one of the most specimens of
Ayurveda universal method to live the life come up to health. It’s taste is bitter [4].
Classification
Empire Plantae/Plants
Alternate-empire “Tracheophytes”
Division “Magnoliphyta”
Sub- Division Seed plant/Spermatophyte
Order: “Lamiales”
Class: “Magnoliopsida”
Family- “Lamiaceae”
Genus: “Ocimum”
Species: “O. tenuiflorum”
Synonyms
 Sanskrit : Surasa, Krishna tulasi, Bana Tulasi
 Assamese : Tulasii
 Bengali : Tulasai
 English : Holy Basil
 Gujrati : Tulasei, Tulsi
 Hindi : Tulasii
 Kannada : Tulaseii, Shri Tulsi, Vishanu Tulsi
 Malayalam : Tulsii, Tulasae
 Marathi : Tulase
 Punjabi : Tulsi
 Tamil : Tulaesi, Thulasii, Theiru Theezaei
 Telugu : Tulasii
 Urdu : Raihana, Tulss
Morphology
Distribution Grow upto 30 - 60 cm height [5].
Territory Found throughout the Indis [5].
Habit Annual herb[5].
Mool Thiny, wired, branches, hairs, soft, colour black to brown from external or
dull and violet internal [5].
Tana Stiff, greenly, wooded, branches are hairy, external colour pinkish-brown to
black, internal colour dull yellowish, fracture: stringy and slightly aromatic
odour [5].
Patra Leafs are 2.5 to 5cm long 1.6 to 3.2 cm wide, elliptically egg shaped, dumb
or acute apex, hairy on both sides. Petiole is thin, hairy; odour, aromatic[5].
Chaal Colour: Greyish brown from outside and pale pink from inside, longitudinal
cracks are present [5].
Pushpa Purplish or crimson coloured, calyx elliptical or campanulated 3-4 mm
bilipped, odour is aromatic, taste is pungent [5].
Phal Four nutlets, each contains one seed, membranous, colour is dull brown or
reddish with small black patches, odour is aromatic, taste is pungent[5].
Beej Shape is oval, colour is brown, mucilaginous when soaked in water,
odourless, taste is pungent [5].
Varieties of tulsi
Various types of tulsi which cultivated in different parts of the World, they are categorized in
2 groups[7].
A. Holy basil
It is known as Tulsi and is the most revered houseplant, in India it is associated with
ayurveda and hindu religion as goddess of wealth, health and prosperity. This is further
classified into 4 species [7]:
 O. sanctum (Rama-tulsi)
 O. tenuiflorum (Krishna-tulsi)
 O. tenuiflorum (Amrita-tulsi)
 O. gratissum (Vana-tulsi)
B. Mediterranean Basil
It is known as Sweet basil and is the most popular variety of basil which is found all over
the world including Asia, Eurpe, America and Africa. It is most consumed herb
worldwide and characterized in several further types [7]:
 Sweet basil (O. basilicum)
 Thai basil (O. thyrsiflora)
 Purple basil (O. basilicum)
 Lemon basil (O. citriodorum)
European Journal of Molecular & Clinical Medicine
ISSN 2515-8260 Volume 07, Issue 07, 2020
2836
 Vietnamese basil (O. cinnamon)
 American basil (O. americanum)
 African blue basil (O. kilimandscharicum)
 Italian genovese basil (O. basilicum)
Phytochemistry
 Extract of fresh leafs and stem contains some antioxidants compounds like
“cirsilineol”, “circimaritin”, “isothymusin”, “apigenin”, “rosameric acid”, and
considerable properties of “eugeno”.
 The leaf has 0.7% “volatile oil” muster regarding 71% “eugenol” & 20% “methyl
eugenol”.
 It’s oil have “carvacrol” & “sesquiterpine hydrocarbon caryophyllene”[8].
Properties or Actions
 Rassa : Kattu, Tiktaa, Kashya [5]
 Gunna : Laghau, Ruksh, Tikshn [5]
 Virya : Ushnna [5]
 Vipak : Kattu [5]
 Karma: Depana, Hridya, Kaphahara, Rucya, Vatahara, Pittavardhini, Durgandhihara
[5].
Medicinal properties
MEDICINAL PROPERTIES:
1,3,4
 Tulsi has antioxidant properties and reduces blood glucose levels, and blood
pressure[9].
 It reduces lipid level. So, it is good for heart disorders [10].
 It builds the stamina and it is essential ingredient of herbal tea [9].
 It also used to treat gastric disorders, cough, common colds, malaria, and headaches
[10].
 It’s extracted water is used as mouth wash to reduce tooth ache [9].
 It is used in the manufacturing of many skin ointments and cosmetics because it
contains anti-bacterial activities [10].
 It’s oil shows stomach poisoning against “malarial larva”[10].
 It has immuno-modulatory properties [11].
 It acts as repellent for insect. So, it is widely used to store grains[9].
 A chemical present in tulsi known as beta-Ursolic acid, may used as a anti-fertility
agent in future [10].
Traditional uses
 "The elixir of life" name given to tulsi because it promotes longevity [2].
 In Ayurveda & Siddha systems of medicine in which various parts of plant are used
for prevention and cure of many diseases[2].
 The leafs are used enhance the memory [2].
 Chewing of leafs helps to treat ulcers and infections of mouth [2].
HEALTH BENEFITS OF TULSI IN OUR DAILY LIFE:
,6,7
Health benefits of Tulsi in our daily life
 Fever and Common Cold: The leafs are used in many types of fevers. In the duration of
rainy season, when dengue and malaria fever is speeded all over the areas then its leafs
are used as a prevalent method, as leafs are boiled with tea and given to patients [12].
 Coughs: It is a main ingredient in many Ayurvedic cough syrups and other kind of
dosage forms because they help in release mucus in respiratory disorders12].
 Sore Throat: Leafs of this plant are boiled with water and given to a patient with sore
throat illness. This extract also used as a gargle [13].
Respiratory Disorder: The herb is useful in the
 Respiratory Diseases: Tulsi is very good herb to cure the asthma and other swasa
diseases. Kwath of leafs with ginger and honey is very good and effective home remedy
used for all kind of respiratory disorders and cold. This extract with the mixture of
lavang and lavana shows instant aid in influenza [12].
 Kidney Stone: Tulsi shows a very good and effective result on the kidney. If patient has
a renal stone, juice of leafs along with honey if it given for six months it will remove the
stone through urinary tract [13].
isorder: Basil has a beneficial effect in
 Heart Diseases: Tulsi cure all types of heart diseases and the “weakness” of the heart. It
helps to reduce the blood cholesterol level [12].

 For Children's: Common-Diseases of children’s like common cold, high body
temperature, loose stools and vomiting can be cured with juice of leafs. If blisters of
chicken pox late in their appearance, tulsi leafs given with kesar will rush them [13].
 Stress: Tulsi leafs are observed as an stress booster agent [12].
 Insect Bites: Tulsi shows prophylactic or preventive and curative for insect tingle or
bites. Intake of leaf juice and again given after some hours. Kalk of clean roots is used in
case of insect bites [12].

 Skin Disorders: Application of tulsi juice can helps to treat the fungal infection and
other types of skin dosorders. It can also used to cure leucoderma [13].
 Dental disorders: Leafs dried under the sunlight and powdered, can be used in cleaning
of teeth cure the teeth disorders. Some power if mixed with mustered oil to create a kalk
and applied as dental cream. This also treat pyorrhoea and other teeth diseases [12].
Pharmacological Studies
Activity Effect
Antioxidant Polyphenol Rosmarinic acid is present in the Tulsi acts as antioxidant. It is safeguard of the cells of human body from breaking
due to the resistance of “free radicals”. More oxidation in the body
also had done the cell damage. This acid helps to decreases the
development of excess oxidation[12,13]
Anti-bacterial Carvacrol/terpene anti-bacterial chemicals is there in the tulsi.
Sesquiterpene B-caryophyllene also a anti-bacterial agent. It helps
to prevent the human body from Bacterium which may cause the
various diseases [12, 14].
Antiinflammatory
Rosmarinic acid present in tulsi shows a anti-inflammatory effect
and anti-oxidant [15].
Adaptogenic Tulsi is a good and rich source of Rasayana properties which helps
to cure the common mood changing activity of body and shows
the mental calm and clarity. Eugenol and caryophyllene are the
mainly very important Rasayana properties present in the tulsi
[12].
Immunomodulator
Tulsi have outstanding immune-enhancing functions that bild
the body against unfamiliar elements like bacteria, viruses,
microbes, allergens etc. Thus, it helps to maintains the balance in
the body[15].
Antimicrobial
effects :–
Anti-microbial
effects
Essential oil present in it has anti-bacterial antiseptic and anti-viral
properties. It inhibites the growth of E.coli, B.anthracis,
M.tuberculosis etc. Extract considerably cut down the cause of
diseases, scientific indications and the bio-chemical frame work in
sufferer with any kind of viral infections [12].
Anti diabetic
effect
Anti-diabetic
effect
The result shows 17.6 % decrease in without meal blood sugar and
7.3% decrease in post-prandial blood sugar on treating with
this drug as compare to the blood sugar levels while treating
with placebo[16-20].
Antifertility
effect
Ursolic acid has been investigated to own anti-fertility movement
in animals. This result have been credited to its anti-estrogenic
outcome which may be dependable for spermatogenesis in gents
and non dependable effect on implantation of ovum in ladies
[12].
Antioxidant - Porinic ac
CONCLUSION
Ocimum sanctum is a conventional plant used for the management of a largest variety of
disorders such as anti-viral agent, antiseptic, reduce inflammation, anti-oxidant, anti-ulcer,
injury, to cure diabetes mellitus, bacillary dysentery, loose motions, purgative, vermifuges,
astringent, cure leprosy, prevent the formation of goitre, treat tumour, remedy for pest bite &
venom, in indigestion and relieving flatulence. It have so many ancient value in treating
number of disorders has been confirmed by a pharmacological screening of high range of
plant part. The traditional uses are not warranted to justify because there is still a lack of
clinical data for its value, and clinical trials. It also has a lot of secreted medicinal properties
which can be again evaluated in the future.