THERAPEUTIC USES OF OCIMUM SANCTUM LINN (TULSI) WITH
A NOTE ON EUGENOL AND ITS PHARMACOLOGICAL
ACTIONS: A SHORT REVIEW

Abstract : The medicinal plants are widely used by the traditional medical
practitioners for curing various diseases in their day to day practice. In
traditional systems of medicine, different parts (leaves, stem, flower, root,
seeds and even whole plant) of Ocimum sanctum Linn (known as Tulsi in
Hindi), a small herb seen throughout India, have been recommended for
the treatment of bronchitis, bronchial asthma, malaria, diarrhea, dysentery,
skin diseases, arthritis, painful eye diseases, chronic fever, insect bite
etc. The Ocimum sanctum L. has also been suggested to possess
antifertility, anticancer, antidiabetic, antifungal, antimicrobial,
hepatoprotective, cardioprotective, antiemetic, antispasmodic, analgesic,
adaptogenic and diaphoretic actions.
Eugenol (l-hydroxy-2-methoxy-4-allylbenzene), the active constituent
present in Ocimum sanctum L., has been found to be largely responsible
for the therapeutic potentials of Tulsi. Although because of its great
therapeutic potentials and wide occurrence in India the practitioners of
traditional systems of medicine have been using Ocimum sanctum L. for
curing various ailments, a rational approach to this traditional medical
practice with modern system of medicine is, however, not much available.
In order to establish the therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum L. in modern
medicine, in last few decades several Indian scientists and researchers
have studied the pharmacological effects of steam distilled, petroleum
ether & benzene extracts of various parts of Tulsi plant and eugenol
on immune system, reproductive system, central nervous system,
cardiovascular system, gastric system, urinary system and blood
biochemistry and have described the therapeutic significance of Tulsi in
management of various ailments. These pharmacological studies have
established a scientific basis for therapeutic uses of this plant.
Key words : tulsi medicin

INTRODUCTION
Plants are one of the most important
sources of medicines. Today the large
number of drugs in use are derived from
plants, like morphine from Papaver
somniferum, Aswagandha from Withania
somnifera, Ephedrine from Ephedra
vulgaris, Atropine from Atropa belladonna,
Reserpine from Roulphia serpentina etc. The
medicinal plants are rich in secondary
metabolites (which are potential sources of
drugs) and essential oils of therapeutic
importance. The important advantages
claimed for therapeutic uses of medicinal
plants in various ailments are their safety
besides being economical, effective and their
easy availability (1, 2). Because of these
advantages the medicinal plants have been
widely used by the traditional medical
practitioners in their day to day practice.
According to a survey (1993) of World Health
Organization (WHO), the practitioners of
traditional system of medicine treat about
80% of patients in India, 85% in Burma and
90% in Bangladesh (2, 3). In traditional
systems of medicine the Indian medicinal
plants have been used in successful
management of various disease conditions
like bronchial asthma, chronic fever, cold,
cough, malaria, dysentery, convulsions,
diabetes, diarrhea, arthritis, emetic
syndrome, skin diseases, insect bite etc.
and in treatment of gastric, hepatic,
cardiovascular & immunological disorders
(1, 4–8).
The medicinal use of plants is very old.
The writings indicate that therapeutic use
of plants is as old as 4000–5000 B.C. and
Chinese used first the natural herbal
preparations as medicines. In India,however, earliest references of use of plants
as medicine appear in Rigveda which is said
to be written between 3500–1600 B.C. Later
the properties and therapeutic uses of
medicinal plants were studied in detail and
recorded empirically by the ancient
physicians in Ayurveda (an indigenous
system of medicine) which is a basic
foundation of ancient medical science in
India (9).
In Ayurveda Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum L.)
has been well documented for its therapeutic
potentials and described as Dashemani
Shwasaharni (antiasthmatic) and antikaphic drugs (Kaphaghna) (9). Although the
traditional medical practitioners in India
have been widely using this medicinal
plant for management of various disease
conditions from ancient time, not much is
known about the mode of action of Tulsi,
and a rational approach to this traditional
medical practice with modern system of
medicine is also not available. In last few
decades several studies have been carried
out by Indian scientists and researchers to
suggest the role of essential oils & eugenol
in therapeutic potentials of Ocimum
sanctum L. (4, 12). Eugenol is a phenolic
compound and major constituent of essential
oils extracted from different parts of Tulsi
plant. The therapeutic potential of Tulsi has
been established on the basis of several
pharmacological studies carried out with
eugenol and steam distilled, petroleum ether
and benzene extracts of different parts of
Tulsi plant (4, 10, 12, 15, 18, 21, 23–27).
The present article incorporates the names
of some important plants of genus Ocimum,
therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum L. and
pharmacological actions & sources of
eugenol.Ocimum sanctum Linn (Tulsi): A plant from genus
Ocimum
Among the plants known for medicinal
value, the plants of genus Ocimum
belonging to family Labiatae are very
important for their therapeutic potentials.
Ocimum sanctum L. (Tulsi), Ocimum
gratissium (Ram Tulsi), Ocimum canum
(Dulal Tulsi), Ocimum basilicum (Ban
Tulsi), Ocimum kilimandscharicum,
Ocimum ammericanum, Ocimum camphora
and Ocimum micranthum are examples of
known important species of genus Ocimum
which grow in different parts of the world
and are known to have medicinal properties
(1, 4–9, 11–15, 17, 23). Ocimum sanctum
L., known as ‘Tulsi’ in Hindi and ‘Holy Basil’
in English, is an erect softy hairy aromatic
herb or undershrub found throughout India.
Tulsi is commonly cultivated in gardens.
Two types of Ocimum sanctum L. are met
within cultivation: (i) Tulsi plants with
green leaves known as Sri Tulsi & (ii) Tulsi
plants with purple leaves known as Krishna
Tulsi (14). Ocimum sanctum L. is held
sacred by Hindus and is used as medicinal
plants in day to day practice in Indian
homes for various ailments (12).
Therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum Linn (Tulsi)
Several medicinal properties have been
attributed to Ocimum sanctum L. (16–27).
Different parts of Tulsi plant e.g. leaves,
flowers, stem, root, seeds etc. are known to
possess therapeutic potentials and have
been used, by traditional medical
practitioners, as expectorant, analgesic,
anticancer, antiasthmatic, antiemetic,
diaphoretic, antidiabetic, antifertility,
hepatoprotective, hypotensive, hypolipidmic
and antistress agents. Tulsi has also been
used in treatment of fever, bronchitis,
arthritis, convulsions etc.
Aqueous decoction of Tulsi leaves is
given to patients suffering from gastric and
hepatic disorders (12, 14). Herbal
preparations containing Ocimum sanctum L.
have been suggested to shorten the course
of illness, clinical symptoms and biochemical
parameters in patients suffering from
viral hepatitis (12). The leaf juice of
Ocimum sanctum L. along with Triphala is
used in Ayurvedic eye drop preparations
recommended for glucoma, cataract, chronic
conjunctivitis and other painful eye
diseases. The juice of fresh leaves is also
given to patients to treat chronic fever,
dysentery, hemorrhage and dyspepsia
(12, 14). A decoction of Tulsi leaves is a
popular remedy for cold (12, 14). Tulsi
leaves also check vomiting and has been as
anthelmintic (4).
As a prophylactic against malaria, fresh
Tulsi leaves are taken with black pepper in
the morning (14). Ayurvedic preparation
containing Ocimum sanctum L., Allium
stivum, Piper nigram and Curcuma longa
has been shown to possess antimalarial
activity against Plasmodium vivex and
Plasmodium falciparum (12). This preparation
has been found to relieve the clinical
symptoms in 52% of Plasmodium vivex
patients and 100% of Plasmodium falciparum
patients (12). A decoction of the root of Tulsi
plant is given as a diaphoretic in malarial
fever (14). As far as its antimalarial effect
is concerned Tulsi extracts and essential oil
have also been found to possess insecticidal
and larvicidal activities against mosquitoes
(12). Ocimum sanctum L. also possesses antifungal activity against Asperigillus
niger (12). Aqueous extract of Tulsi is found
effective in patients suffering from viral
encephalitis (12).
Aqueous decoction of whole plant lowers
the blood sugar (glucose) level and is said
to control diabetes mellitus (23). Paste of
Tulsi leaves are found effective in the
treatment of ring-worm and other skin
diseases (4, 12, 14). Tulsi has been also
recommended for use as antidote for dog
bite, scorpion bite and insect bite in
traditional system of medicine (4, 12, 14).
The fresh leaves and flower tops of Ocimum
sanctum L. have been used as antispasmodic
agent (as smooth muscle relaxant) (4, 12).
The seeds are mucilaginous and demulcent
and are given in disorders of the
genitourinary system (12). The leaves of
Tulsi plant have also been shown to possess
good anti-stress (adaptogenic), analgesic,
anti-hyperlipidemic, antioxidant potentials
in experimental animals (10, 12, 21, 22, 26,
27). Leaves and seeds of Tulsi plants have
been reported to reduce blood and urinary
uric acid level in albino rabbits and possess
diuretic property (25). Gastric ulceration
and secretion are reported to be inhibited
by Tulsi in albino rats (4, 24).
The leaves of Ocimum sanctum L. are
said to have abortifacient effect in women
(5, 11, 16). Ocimum sanctum L. has also
got antifertility effect (16–20). In Kerla the
local women as well as the Ayurvedic
physicians have been reported to use the
leaves of Tulsi for antifertility effect (16).
The benzene and petroleum ether extracts
of leaves of Ocimum sanctum L. have been
reported to produce 80% and 60% antifertility
activity respectively in female rats (16,17). In male rats benzene extract of Tulsi
leaves has been suggested to reduce
spermatogenesis by retarding the sertoli
cell activity without affecting the germ
cells (18). The role of sertoli cells in the
maturation of spermatogenesis is well
known. The seeds of Ocimum ammericanum
have been found to possess antifertility
activity in women when given along with
Actinopteris radiate (17). The leaves of
Ocimum canum (known as ‘Dulal Tulsi’ in
Hindi) have been shown to possess antiimplantation activity in experimental albino
rats (12, 17).
Ursolic acid, one of the major
constituents of the Tulsi leaves, has been
suggested to possess antifertility effect in
rats of both sexes and in male mice (12).
Ursolic acid because of its anti-estrogenic
effect reduces spermatogenesis and causes
a decrease in sperm counts (12). Several
other pharmacological effects, such as antitumor, hepatoprotective, anti-inflammatory
(oral & topical), anti-ulcer, antimicrobial,
anti-hyperlipidemic, and anti-viral activities,
have also been attributed to ursolic acid
(28).
Pharmacological actions of eugenol
Several studies have shown that steam
distilled essential oils extracted from fresh
leaves of Ocimum sanctum L. have
therapeutic importance. The therapeutic
potential of the essential oils extracted from
fresh leaves of Ocimum sanctum L. has been
found to be largely due to eugenol (major
constituent of the essential oil) which is a
phenolic compound (l-hydroxy-2-methoxy-4-
allylbenzene) (4, 12, 30). In order to
understand the mode of action of Ocimumsanctum L., to explain its therapeutic
potentials in management of various disease
conditions and to establish its use in modern
medicine, several investigations have been
carried out to study the pharmacological
actions of the eugenol, essential oils
(extracted from Tulsi leaves) & extracts of
Tulsi on immune system, central nervous
system, gastric system, reproductive system,
blood biochemistry etc. in experimental
animals (4, 10, 12, 15, 18, 21, 23–27).
Eugenol and the essential oils have been
found to reduce raised blood sugar,
triglyceride & cholesterol levels and
activities of LDH, GPT, GOT and alkaline
phosphatase (diagnostic clinical enzymes) in
blood serum explaining the therapeutic
potentials of Ocimum sanctum L. as
antidiabetic, cardioprotective, hypolipidemic
and hepatoprotective agent. Eugenol has
been well shown to possess the vasorelaxing
action on rabbit arterial tissue indicating
its therapeutic importance as a vasodilator
(29).
Eugenol and the essential oils have also
been observed to possess membrane
stabilizing properties on synaptosomes,
erythrocytes and mast cells which account
for the therapeutic potentials of Tulsi
in management of neurological (e.g.
convulsions & epilepsy), inflammatory and
allergic disorders (4). The therapeutic use
of Ocimum sanctum L. in treatment of
gastric ulcer has been attributed to
antiulcerogenic action of eugenol and
essential oil extracted from Tulsi leaves (4,
24). Lowering of uric acid level by extract
of Tulsi leaves and eugenol claims the
therapeutic potential of Ocimum sanctum
L. in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (4,
25). Eugenol and the essential oils have alsobeen shown to be immunostimulant claiming
the therapeutic potential of Ocimum
sanctum L. in immunological disorders
associated with immunosuppression (4, 12).
Essential oils extracted from the leaves
of Ocimum sanctum L. has been found to
inhibit in-vitro growth of E. coli, B.
anthracis and P. aeruginosa showing its
antibacterial activity (12). Tulsi also has
anti-tubercular activity and inhibits in-vitro
growth of M tuberculosis (12). The essential
oils extracted from Tulsi leaves also possess
anti-fungal and anti-viral activity (12).
Plant sources of eugenol
Eugenol has great importance in
pharmaceutical industry and usually
extracted from clove buds (known as ‘Laung’
in Hindi) of Eugenia caryophyllata Thumb,
belonging to family Mytraceae, and from
leaves and barks of Cinnamomum
zeylanicum Breyn (known as ‘Dalchini’ in
Hindi), belonging to family Lauraceae (14,
30). The clove buds and leaves & bark of
plant Dalchini are rich sources of eugenol
containing about 70–85% and 20–50%
eugenol respectively (30). Although these
plant sources are rich in eugenol but
because of their higher prices the
commercial extraction of eugenol from them
is costly. In contrast to these sources
Ocimum sanctum L. (Tulsi) and Ocimum
basilicum (Ban Tulsi) are cheaper sources
for commercial extraction of eugenol (30).
The aerial parts (leaves, flowers & stem) of
these plants contain essential oils with good
percentage of eugenol (12, 30). The leaves
of Ocimum sanctum L. are chief source of
essential oils followed by the inflorescence
and stem, however, flowers contain more essential oils than leaves in Ocimum
basilicum. The roots and fruits of these
plants are almost completely devoid of any
essential oil (12, 30). The essential oil
extracted from the Tulsi leaves by steam
distillation largely contains eugenol. The
other important constituents of the
essential oil are carvacrol, methyl eugenol,
caryophyllene etc. (30). Quantitative
variations have been seen in the composition
of essential oils of Ocimum sanctum L.
growing in different parts of India (12, 30).
The percent of eugenol in essential oil of
Ocimum sanctum L. varies from 40% (in
Jammu) to 71% (in Assam) (30). Seasonal
variation has also been observed in
composition of essential oil extracted from
Tulsi leaves (12, 30). In month of November,
Ocimum sanctum L. has been found to yield
maximum amount of eugenol (30).
To produce eugenol-rich Ocimum
variety, scientists of Regional Research
Laboratory (RRL), Jammu, have developed a hybrid strain of Ocimum gratissimum L.
using recurrent selection (FCA) technique
of breeding and named it as “Clocimum”
(31). This “Clocimum” variety contains
60–65% eugenol and has been released by
RRL to private partites for commercial
multiplication on the field for production of
eugenol. In RRL, Jammu, another heterotic
F1 strain of Ocimum has been developed
and named as “Clocimum-3c”. This is an
improved Eugenol-rich Ocimum variety
containing 90–95% eugenol (31). This
variety has also been released to the private
and commercial farmers under the trade
name RRL-og-1.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors thankfully acknowledge the
keen interest and the support offered
by Mrs. Seema Gupta, Chairperson, and
Prof. J. N. Jaiswal, Principal, Seema
Dental College & Hospital, Rishikesh, in
preparation of this manuscript.