Holy Basil washcoll

Ocimum tenuiflorum is an adaptogenic herb traditionally used within Indian medicine that can provide healing for the body, mind, and spirit.

Scientific Name: Ocimum tenuiflorum
Common Name: Holy Basil; Tulsi
Plant Family: Lamiaceae/Labiatae (Mint family)

Etymology: Ocimum tenuiflorum is used widely in Hinduism practices, where it got its name from the manifestation of the goddess Lakshmi (Tulasi). As Tulsi traveled along early trade routes, Ocimum tenuiflorum became known as sacred or holy basil.”

Traditional Uses
The plant Ocimum tenuiflorum is used widely in Hinduism, as the presence of holy basil is believed to increased piety, foster meditation, purify, and protect. The plant is cultivated in many temples and the stems of the plants are used for craft for japa mala, rosaries. Additionally, water mixed with holy basil has been used to soothe and elevate the souls of dying people. The leaves are commonly used for cooking as it has a bitter and spicy taste.  

Medicinal uses range from treating bronchitis, indigestion, malaria, stomach ulcers, eye diseases, insect bites, and eczema. Holy basil serves as an adaptogenic herb that is also an antioxidant and provide stress relief. Holy basil is used for anxiety, stress, managing diabetes, managing high cholesterol, and promote longevity.

Edible Parts
Holy basil has many edible parts, the flowers, leaves, seeds, and extract can all be used medicinally. The fresh flowers are used to treat bronchitis, the leaves and seeds are used to treat malaria, and extracts can be used for stomach ulcers and eye diseases. The entire plant can be used to treat nausea and vomiting. Overall, Ocimum tenuiflorum is a very versatile, edible plant.

Gathering and Using
Holy basil can be cut and dried by cutting the plant above the bottom two or three sets of true leaves. The plant should be cut before the sun comes out, but after dew dries on the leaves of the plant. Pinch off dead or damaged leaves and check for insects, leaving only the healthy leaves on the cutting. Tie the sprigs together and let the holy basil hang in a dark and cool area to promote drying. The plant is now ready to be used!

Additionally, holy basil can be used as an extract, put in supplements, used in freshly brewed tea, or eaten raw and added as a spice in cooking.

Permaculture Functions and Considerations 
Edible flowers, leaves, stems, and seeds, medicine/apatogenic properties, wildlife food, biomass, organic matter, pollinator habitat, rain garden, rootstock, carbon sequestration, insect repellent, and beads for rosaries. The plant can be pressed for oil extract and used medicinally. Holy basil is a very important herb in Ayurvedic tradition.

Habitat
You can expect to find Ocimum tenuiflorum growing in moist to wet soil and lowland tropics. It is grown best when daytime temperatures are within the range of 20-28 degrees celcius. Holy basil prefers well-drained soil and it is best to plant in a sunny position.

How to Identify
Holy basil leaves have a glossy cuticle and oval-shaped leaves with smooth or slightly toothed edges. The leaves are arranged oppositely along the square stems, as with all plants in the mint family. Holy basil has small flowers from terminal clusters, ranging in color from white to magenta. Additionally, the younger stem has a slightly brown or purple color.

Wildlife Support
Beyond providing medicinal used for people, holy basil is food for aphids, spiders, and slugs.   Holy basil’s flowers attract bees, butterflies, and other pollinators.

Additional Information
Tulsi, holy basil, scavenges free radicals in the body, so many researchers believe it has anti-cancerous properties!

Sources
Time of India
How to Identify Holy Basil
PFAF Holy Basil
Healthline Holy Basil
How to Harvest Holy Basil
Holy Basil Health Benefits
Holy Basil Health/Vitamin Benefits
Britannica Holy Basil
Holy Basil Benefits
USDA Holy Basil Plant Profile