Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil)

Abstract
This datasheet on Ocimum tenuiflorum covers Identity, Overview, Distribution, Dispersal, Diagnosis, Biology & Ecology, Environmental Requirements, Impacts, Uses, Genetics and Breeding, Food Quality, Food Safety, Further Information.
Identity
Preferred Scientific Name
Ocimum tenuiflorum L.
Preferred Common Name
holy basil
Other Scientific Names
Ocimum americanum sunsu Bello
Ocimum micranthum sensu A. Stahl
Ocimum sanctum L.
International Common Names
Englishbrush-leaf-teasacred basilThai basil
Spanishalbahaca cimarronaalbahaca morada
Chinesesheng luo le
Local Common Names
Brazilmanjericao-branco
Cubaalbahaca violadaalbahaquillaibahaca morada criolla
Dominican Republicalbahaca vaca
Guamyerba buena
Indiatulsi
Myanmarkala-pi-seinpin-sein-net
Nepalkrishna tulasisurasatulasi
Swedenhelig basilica
Pictures
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); flowers and seeds. Garden of Eden Keanae, Maui, Hawaii, USA. March 2011.
Flowers and seeds
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); flowers and seeds. Garden of Eden Keanae, Maui, Hawaii, USA. March 2011.
©FOREST & KIM STARR-2011 - CC BY 4.0
OPEN IN VIEWER
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); flowers. Sand Island, Midway Atoll, Hawaii, USA. March 2015.
Flowers
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); flowers. Sand Island, Midway Atoll, Hawaii, USA. March 2015.
©FOREST & KIM STARR-2015 - CC BY 4.0
OPEN IN VIEWER
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); habit and leaves. Kahului, Maui, Hawaii, USA. January 2008.
Habit
Ocimum tenuiflorum (holy basil); habit and leaves. Kahului, Maui, Hawaii, USA. January 2008.
©FOREST & KIM STARR-2008 - CC BY 4.0

Bolivar, Delta Amacuro
History of Introduction and Spread
O. tenuiflorum, holy basil, is an annual or short-lived perennial of Asian origin that has been used as a culinary and medicinal herb for thousands of years, first in India and Africa, then across Asia (Wyk and Wink, 2004). Historically, the species was frequently grown in large vessels in the courtyards of Hindu forts and temples to cleanse the body (Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014). The species has now been distributed pantropically as cultivated plants.

Date of introduction to the West Indies is uncertain but O. tenuiflorum was included in Bello Espinosa’s (1881) work on Puerto Rico, in which he identified it as Ocimum americanum. Specimens were collected in the Americas around the turn of the twentieth century, in Puerto Rico in 1885 and Cuba in 1909 (Smithsonian Herbarium collections), as well as in Mexico sometime before 1936 (as O. sanctum) and in Colombia in 1936 (JSTOR Global Plants, 2014). It was introduced to northeast Brazil in 1970 (Machado et al., 1999).
Risk of Introduction
Risk of introduction for O. tenuiflorum is moderate and likely to rise as it continues to be widely cultivated around the world for food and medicinal purposes. The species is listed as an agricultural and environmental weed in the Global Compendium of Weeds (Randall, 2012), is included in the Taiwan Invasive Species Database (2014), and is reported to be invasive to Cuba (Oviedo-Prieto et al., 2012) and weedy in Malaysia (Globinmed, 2014), Puerto Rico, India, and Palawan (Philippines) (Holm et al., 1979). The species can grow in a variety of soil conditions, propagates by its small and numerous seeds, and grows rapidly (Makri and Kintzios, 2008; NMPB, 2014), and while not difficult to uproot, can grow more strongly after pruning and cause trouble to places where it is weedy. Monitoring and preparation of a risk assessment for this species is recommended.
Means of Movement and Dispersal
O. tenuiflorum has been primarily spread by humans around the world as a cultivated plant for use as a culinary and medicinal plant. Cultivation escape, intentional release, or accidental introduction through human waste and garden debris are possible but unconfirmed reasons the species has become reportedly weedy in some introduced places, and even invasive, such as the case is in Cuba (Oviedo-Prieto et al., 2012). The species propagates by its seeds, which are relatively small, numerous, and encased in nutlets (Stone, 1970; Wagner et al., 2014) that might possibly be dispersed by animals which graze on the edible leaves. 
Pathway Causes
Pathway cause	Notes	Long distance	Local	References
Crop production (pathway cause)	Cultivated both commercially and locally for use as culinary and medicinal herb	Yes	Yes	 
Escape from confinement or garden escape (pathway cause)	 	Yes	Yes	 
Garden waste disposal (pathway cause)	 	Yes	Yes	 
Medicinal use (pathway cause)	 	Yes	Yes	 
OPEN IN VIEWER
Pathway Vectors
Pathway vector	Notes	Long distance	Local	References
Debris and waste associated with human activities (pathway vector)	 	Yes	Yes	 
OPEN IN VIEWER
Similarities to Other Species/Conditions
O. tenuiflorum is closely related to sweet basil, O. basilicum, and several cultivated varieties of basil. O. tenuiflorum is distinguished by the spreading pedicels and the internally glabrous calyces; in Pakistan, there are various colour forms of the species, with combinations of purple or green calyces and purple or white corollas (Flora of Pakistan, 2014).
Habitat
O. tenuiflorum grows in tropical and subtropical regions and is now primarily cultivated in agricultural settings and home gardens, as well as around temples and places of worship, especially in India and Malaysia (Flora of China Editorial Committee, 2014; Globinmed, 2014; NMPB, 2014; USDA-ARS, 2014). No data was found regarding specific habitats where the species has been found naturally, as a weed or a cultivation escape.
Environments
Habitat	Presence	Status
Terrestrial|Terrestrial – Managed|Cultivated / agricultural land	Present, no further details	Productive/non-natural
Terrestrial|Terrestrial – Managed|Managed forests, plantations and orchards	Present, no further details	Productive/non-natural
Terrestrial|Terrestrial – Managed|Urban / peri-urban areas	Present, no further details	Productive/non-natural
Terrestrial|Terrestrial – Managed|Buildings	Present, no further details	Productive/non-natural
OPEN IN VIEWER
Biology and Ecology
O. tenuiflorum is often cultivated as an annual, but can grow for several years as a short-lived perennial. In Malaysia it grows as a small shrub and is easily recognized for its strong, clove-like scent (Globinmed, 2014). In Pakistan there are various cultivated forms of O. tenuiflorum with combinations of purple or green calyces and purple or white corollas (Flora of Pakistan, 2014).
In India, where it is native, the species reportedly thrives in cultivation in areas with relatively high rainfall and humid temperatures (NMPB, 2014). It can grow in soils ranging from rich loam to poor laterite, and is tolerant of salt as well as of soils with pH from alkaline to moderately acidic, but has low tolerance for waterlogged soil (NMPB, 2014). In India it is found at low altitudes up to 900 m (NMPB, 2014).
Chromosome number of O. tenuiflorum is 2n=36 (Mukherjee and Datta, 2005).
Climate
Climate type	Preferred or tolerated	Remarks
Af - Tropical rainforest climate - > 60mm precipitation per month	Tolerated	 
As - Tropical savanna climate with dry summer - < 60mm precipitation driest month (in summer) and < (100 - [total annual precipitation{mm}/25])	Tolerated	 
Aw - Tropical wet and dry savanna climate - < 60mm precipitation driest month (in winter) and < (100 - [total annual precipitation{mm}/25])	Tolerated	 
Cf - Warm temperate climate, wet all year - Warm average temp. > 10°C, Cold average temp. > 0°C, wet all year	Tolerated	 
Cs - Warm temperate climate with dry summer - Warm average temp. > 10°C, Cold average temp. > 0°C, dry summers	Tolerated	 
Cw - Warm temperate climate with dry winter - Warm temperate climate with dry winter (Warm average temp. > 10°C, Cold average temp. > 0°C, dry winters)	Tolerated	 
OPEN IN VIEWER
Soil Tolerances
Soil texture > light
Soil texture > medium
Soil reaction > acid
Soil reaction > neutral
Soil reaction > alkaline
Special soil tolerances > saline
Special soil tolerances > infertile
Impact Summary
Category	Impact
Environment (generally)	Negative
Human health	Negative
OPEN IN VIEWER
Impact: Social
O. tenuiflorum is known to be capable of minor negative impacts on human health; it can cause skin reactions and temporarily lower male fertility, although no clinical trials have shown adverse effects (WHO, 2004; Globinmed, 2014; Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014).
Risk and Impact Factors
Invasiveness
Proved invasive outside its native range
Abundant in its native range
Tolerates, or benefits from, cultivation, browsing pressure, mutilation, fire etc
Tolerant of shade
Fast growing
Has propagules that can remain viable for more than one year
Has high genetic variability
Impact mechanisms
Rapid growth
Likelihood of entry/control
Highly likely to be transported internationally deliberately
Uses
O. tenuiflorum is a medicinal, culinary and essential oil plant, stated by Ravi et al. (2012) to be the ‘most sacred herb in India’. In China, the leaves of O. tenuiflorum, as well as other members of the basil genus are used as a condiment in salads and other foods, and as a substitute for tea (Flora of China Editorial Committee, 2014). Similarly, in Guam the species is reportedly used as both a condiment and medicine (Stone, 1970).
Holy basil is widely used as a culinary spice in the cuisines of Thailand, Indonesia and other South-east Asian countries. In most countries its use is similar to that of the sweet basil. Thai cuisine uses of holy basil for many recipes such as Thai basil chicken, holy basil chicken, chicken stir fry with holy basil, Thai krapow gai and many others, In South-east Asian countries its use is similar to the use of sweet basil in Western countries (Ravindran, 2017).
Holy basil is used in many dishes, including simple stir-fries. Substituting holy basil with any other basil will not give the same taste to the original dish. When freshly picked, the aromatic leaves hold a spicy, peppery bite and a delicious combination of basil and mint flavours. The zestful blend of fragrance and tastes becomes particularly pronounced in cooking; it is preferable to cook with holy basil rather than use it raw. The peppery spiciness of holy basil has earned it the name of ‘hot basil’ and it is identified as such in some Thai markets. Holy basil is not used in cooking in India because it is held as a highly sacred plant (Ravindran, 2017).
The species has a wide range of reported medicinal uses, mostly relating to stomach-related illnesses and skin problems. In Thailand, for example, it is used to alleviate nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and flatulence, and it is also used as a major flavouring ingredient in Thai cuisine (Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014). In Nepal, O. tenuiflorum is reportedly used as a stomachic, anthelmintic, alexcipharmic, antipyretic, as well as for diseases of the heart and blood, toothaches, earaches, headaches, chronic joint pain, ashthma, gonorrhoea, diarrhoea, and chronic dysentery, and is commonly used to reduce fevers, for coughs and colds, and for influenza (IUCN Nepal, 2000). In India it is regarded as having a versatile role in traditional medicine, with antimicrobial, antioxidant, heptaprotective, radio-protective, antistress, antiinflammatory, antidiabetic, antifertility, neuroprotective, antiulcer, cardio-protective, anticancer, immunomodulatory and mosquito repellent properties (Shivabasappa et al., 2014). Pingale et al. (2012) reported that the plant extract has recently been shown to have potent radioprotective activity, as well as a wide range of other uses.
Because O. tenuiflorum is regarded as sacred in Hinduism, the woody stems are used to make prayer beads for rosaries (Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014; USDA-ARS, 2014) and the plant is often cultivated around Hindu temples and places of worship.
The essential oil in the leaves of O. tenuiflorum contains high levels of eugenol, and clinical trials have suggested the species’ potential for alleviating hepatic dysfunction (Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014). The leaf extract is effective as a mosquito repellent and in checking the spread of the fungal pathogens Pyricularia oryzae and Rhizoctonia solani, which cause blast disease and sheath blight disease of rice, with antibacterial activity and deterrent effects against the larvae of root knot nematode (Meloidogyne incognita) also reported (Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, 2014). Eugenol has been reported to be largely responsible for the therapeutic potentials of the plant, while methyl eugenol is a high value aroma chemical used as a flavouring agent (Raina et al., 2013). Other chemical constituents of the plant include methyl cinnamate, camphor and thymol (Ravi et al., 2012).
Uses List
General > Ritual uses
Materials > Beads
Materials > Essential oils
Materials > Pesticide
Medicinal, pharmaceutical > Source of medicine/pharmaceutical
Medicinal, pharmaceutical > Traditional/folklore
Human food and beverage > Beverage base
Human food and beverage > Spices and culinary herbs
Human food and beverage > Vegetable
Ornamental > Potted plant
Propagation
Pollination is by bees and propagation is through seeds (Ravindran, 2017).
Nutritional Value
O. tenuiflorum has essential oils mostly confined to the green leaves and thus has a particular aroma. This leaf scented volatile oil chiefly comprises phenols, terpenes and aldehydes. Besides its essential or fixed oils, the plant also includes alkaloids, glycosides, saponins and tannins. The leaves also contain particular amounts of carotene and ascorbic acid. The reported chemical properties of basil leaves are based on numerous worldwide studies, and hence edaphic and geographic factors are expected to influence different chemical ingredients (Ambrose et al., 2016).
Phytosanitary Issues/Food Safety
Toxicity has been reported for the oil because of the high eugenol content. The LD50 value of the oil for rats is reported as 42.5 ml/kg body weight, indicating the absence of mammalian toxicity. The dry plant extract with eugenol has an LD50 value of 4600–6400 mg/kg. The oil is therefore safe for human consumption . Certain chemotypes contain a high concentration of estragole (methyl chavocol), which has been reported to produce tumours in test animals (Ravindran, 2017). The currently recommended level of estragole in food products is a maximum of 0.05 mg/kg (Khan and Abourashed, 2010).
Gaps in Knowledge/Research Needs
Further research is needed on the extent of the threat of the species’ potential, especially in areas where it has already been reported to be invasive or weedy. Risk assessment of the extent of its environmental and economic impacts is recommended.