What Is Holy Basil?

An Anti-Aging Adaptogen That Protects the Heart and Brain

By Sherry Christiansen 
Updated on October 24, 2022
 Medically reviewed by Meredith Bull, ND
Print 
Holy basil tea, dried herbs, essential oil, tincture, and soft gels
Verywell / Anastasiia Tretiak​

Holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum), known in Hindi as tulsi, is a medicinal herb used to combat stress and help address high blood sugar, inflammation, arthritis, and more. Medicinal preparations are made from holy basil's leaves, stems, and seeds of the plant.

Holy Basil has violet flowers and blossoms. The green stems sometimes have a purple tinge. The plant is often used in Thai food. It's much spicier than other types of basil and is sometimes called "hot basil."
This article will look at how it's used, what research shows, the possible side effects, what to look for when buying, and how to prepare and store holy basil.

Other names for holy basil:
Albahaca santa
Bai kaprow
Baranda
Basilic indien/Indian basil
Basilic sacré/basilic sacré pourpre/basilic saint
Green holy basil/red holy basil/sacred basil
Kala tulsi
Krishna tulasi/Krishna tulsi
Manjari
Ocimum sanctum
Rama tulsi
Tulasi
Health Benefits
Hindu people worship holy basil. It's considered the "Mother Medicine of Nature." It’s been revered since ancient times as an herb that can promote a healthy body, mind, and spirit.

The sacred plant is often planted around Hindu shrines. The name tulsi means "the incomparable one."

In Western medicine, holy basil is valued as an adaptogen. That's something that helps your body adapt to stress. The plant has been used to:

Combat negative effects of stress
Stabilize blood sugar levels
Promote longevity
Studies show holy basil has a wide range of health-promoting properties. It's an:1

Adaptogenic
Anti-arthritic
Anti-coagulant
Anti-diabetic
Anti-inflammatory
Anti-pyretic (prevents fever)
Antidiarrheal
Antimicrobial (including antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, and more)
Antioxidant
Antitussive (treats cough)
Liver-, brain-, and heart-protectant
A 2017 review of research suggests holy basil may help "address the psychological, physiological, immunological, and metabolic stresses of modern living."2

What Are Adaptogens?
Adaptogens are plant substances that help your body deal with stress. Adaptogens may:

Balance stress hormones, such as cortisol
Improve brain function
Boost the immune system
Lower inflammation
Improve energy levels
Improve the function of organs and systems
Slow aging


 What Are Adaptogens?
Traditional Uses
Holy basil is used for its many health benefits and is popular in Indian Ayurvedic medicine. Even though research hasn't yet proven its effectiveness, it's used for a long list of conditions.

Infectious conditions:

Bronchitis
Cold and flu
Earache
Fever
Malaria
Tuberculosis
Viral hepatitis
Gastrointestinal problems:

Diarrhea
Dysentery
Nausea and indigestion
Other conditions/symptoms:

Asthma
Anxiety
Back pain
Diabetes
Heart disease
Genitourinary disorders (conditions involving the urinary system and genitals)
Headache
Stress
It's also used to treat snakebites and ringworm and as a mosquito repellant. 

Modern Research
Modern science has gathered evidence supporting some of holy basil's traditional uses.1 In a 2017 review of clinical studies on holy basil, it was found to "provide favorable clinical effects" for:2 

Immunity and infections
Inflammation
Metabolic disorders, including diabetes
Neurocognitive disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease and depression
Other chronic diseases
More research needs to confirm the findings before anyone can say for certain that holy basil is safe and effective for any particular condition.

How It Works
Holy basil has a complex makeup of phytochemicals (plant substances). Researchers have found its leaves contain several bioactive (medicinal) compounds, including:2

Eugenol (clove oil): May lower blood glucose levels, treat digestive and respiratory problems3
Ursolic acid: Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, anticancer, antifungal properties4
ß-caryophyllene: Anti-inflammatory, analgesic (painkiller), antipyretic5
Linalool: Insecticide (kills insects)6
1,8-Cineole (eucalyptol): Cough, allergies, and asthma relief, immune support, anti-inflammatory, anti-leukemia cells7
Recap
Holy basil is a highly valued medicinal herb. It's often used in Thai food. Research shows that it's an adaptogen, which means it helps your body deal with stress. It may also be used to treat many conditions, including diabetes, the common cold, and fever.

Traditional uses are many and preliminary research has begun to back some of them. The plant has a complex makeup including several chemicals believed to be medicinal.

Possible Side Effects
In the 2017 review, the only specific side effect reported was mild nausea that went away with continued use. All of the reviewed studies reported either no side effects or mild ones.2

However, the longest study was only 13 weeks long. So the possible long-term side effects are unknown.8

Special Precautions
Holy basil may pose risks in some situations.

Pregnancy: Avoid holy basil if you're trying to conceive. Preliminary animal studies show it may cause uterine contractions and impair fertility. Holy basil's safety during pregnancy or breastfeeding isn't established.8
Blood clotting: Holy basil may slow blood clotting. Don't take it for two weeks before or after surgery.
Contraindications
Holy basil isn't recommended if you're taking anticoagulants (blood thinners) such as:

Coumadin (warfarin)
Heparin
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
Plavix (clopidogrel)
Fragmin (dalteparin)
Lovenox (enoxaparin)
Ticlid (ticlopidine)
Holy basil can cause relaxation. Don't use it on top of drugs that cause drowsiness.

Talk to your healthcare provider or pharmacist before taking holy basil with prescription drugs, over-the-counter medicine, or supplements.

Recap
In studies, side effects have been mild and few. Longer-term studies are needed to fill out holy basil's safety profile. Avoid holy basil if you're trying to get pregnant or if you're pregnant or breastfeeding. Don't take it if you're on blood thinners. Don't combine it with other drugs that cause drowsiness.

Dried holy basil
Verywell / Anastasia Tretiak 
Selection, Preparation, and Storage
Unlike prescription drugs, herbal supplements aren't regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It’s not always easy to identify which products are potent and pure.

Choose a product that's certified organic, ethically wild-harvested, all-natural, and certified by a third-party organization such as:

U.S. Pharmacopeia
NSF International
ConsumerLab.com 
These organizations evaluate and report on a product’s safety, purity, and potency.

Preparation
Holy basil leaves are often made into tea for medicinal use. But according to traditional Ayurvedic medicine, using the whole plant ensures you get all of the bioactive chemicals.

Make tea by brewing 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried holy basil in boiling water. Steep for 5 or 6 minutes. Drink it at bedtime to get the relaxing effects.
To make an essential oil, distill the plant's leaves and flowers.
Or you can cook with. It's common in Asian dishes. The taste is spicy and bitter.
You can also get it as a supplement. It comes in pill form or as a liquid extract.

Dosage
A safe long-term dosage of holy basil has not been well established. Various dosages have been used in short-term studies.2

500 milligrams (mg) of left extract twice a day reduced anxiety and depression.8 
300 mg per day of leaf extract for 30 days eased central nervous system disorders.9
400 mg of extract in the morning and 800 mg at night for six weeks decreased stress symptoms including sleep and memory problems, severe fatigue, and sexual dysfunction.8
Storage
If you grow your own holy basil, you can harvest the stems and leaves before the flower appears. Dry the sprigs by hanging them upside-down in a dark, cool area for two weeks.

Store the dried herb in a glass jar with an airtight lid. Keep the jar in a cool, dark place and use the holy basil within one year.

Purchased tinctures, dried herbs, and supplement pills should be stored according to the manufacturer's instructions.

Summary
Holy basil is an adaptogen, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and more. It may be beneficial for many conditions. Research is in its early stages but it's starting to support some of the traditional uses.

Side effects may include mild, transient nausea. Some studies reported no side effects. However, longer-term studies need to be done.

It's best not to take holy basil if you're trying to conceive or currently pregnant or breastfeeding. Don't combine it with blood thinners or other drugs that cause drowsiness.

Choose holy basil products that are organic and certified by a third-party lab. You can make it into tea or essential oils. It's available in supplement form as well.

Dosages aren't established. Studies have used between 300 mg per day and 1200 mg a day (in doses of 400 and 800.)
A Word From Verywell
Holy basil appears promising. Still, not enough long-term, quality studies have been done. Its safety and effectiveness still need to be proven.

If you want to try it, talk to your healthcare provider, buy from a reputable source, and take it as directed.

