A Review on Carissa carandas: Traditional Use, Phytochemical Constituents, and Pharmacological properties

Carissa carandas l. (Karaunda) is a widely useful food and medicinal plant of India, Plant-based medicines play an important role in all cultures have been indispensable in maintaining health and combating diseases. Owing to the global trend towards better quality of life, there is a great claim for medicinal plants. Carissa carandas l. plant popularly used as a traditional medicinal plant over thousands of years in the Ayurvedic, Unani, and Homoeopathic system of medicine. The major bioactive elements, which impart the medicinal worth of herbs, are alkaloids, flavonoids, saponins, and huge amounts of cardiac glycosides, triterpenoids, phenolic compounds, and tannins. Traditionally, the whole plant and its parts were used in the treatment of various ailments. It contains several phytochemical constituents belonging to the terpenoids category. The root is attributed to bitter, stomachic; antidiarrheal, vermifuge, and ant anthelmintic properties. The medicinally unripe fruit is used as an astringent. The ripe fruit is taken as an antiscorbutic and therapy for nausea. The leaf decoction is appreciated in cases of alternating fever, diarrhea, oral inflammation, and earache. Also, Carissa carandas have showing a extensive range of evidence for its cardiotonic, hepatoprotective, free radical scavenging and xanthine oxidase inhibitory, histamine-releasing, antirheumatic, antibacterial, antiviral, and anticonvulsant activity. A higher gross heat value of this species indicates its higher potential to be used as a good fuel source. Keywords: Carissa carandas , Phytochemical Constituents, Traditional Use, Pharmacological Properties.
1. INTRODUCTION 
Carissa  carandas    is  a  species  of  flowering  plant  in  the dogbane family,  Apocynaceae.  It  harvests  berry-sized fruits that  are  commonly used as  a condiment or  preservative to Indian  pickles  and  spices.The  shrub  Commonly  name karonda  (Devanagari:  )  karamardaka(Sanskrit), Koromcha(Bengali),  Christ’s  thorn  (South  India),  vakkay (Telugu),  kilaakkaai(Tamil)  and  Karja  tenga(Asam).1  Its botanical  name  was  in  recent  years  altered  to  Carissa congesta  Wight  (syn.  C.  carandas  Auct  formerly  widely shown as Carissa carandas.2 The famous biological activities reported  are  analgesic,  anti-inflammatory,  anti-pyretic, Cardiotonic,  and  histamine-releasing.  The  plant  is  also  an alternative source of oil, hydrocarbon, and phytochemicals.3 1.1 Description of Karaunda Tree: - Carissa  carandas    Linn.  Is  a    dichotomously  pronged evergreen  shrub  with  a short  branch  and strong  thorns  in pairs,  Carissa  carandas    Linn  is  an  evergreen  diffuse  and spiny shrub occurring through the country. The plant is very valued for the Indian System of medicine mainly Ayurveda. It is used for  alleviating Vata and pitta  disorders.4 Species is a rank-growing, usually  growing to  10 or  15  ft (3-5 m)  high, sometimes  ascending  to  the  tops  of  tall trees;  and  rich  in white  gummy  latex.  The  branches,  many  and  dispersal, forming dense masses,  are set  with sharp thorns, simple or forked,  up to  2  in (5  cm)  long,  in pairs  in the  axils of  the leaves.  The  leaves  are  evergreen,  opposite,  oval  or  egg-shaped,  1  to  3  in  (2.5-7.5  cm)  long;  dark-green,  leathery, glossy  on  the upper  surface,  lighter  green,  and dull  on the underside. The fragrant flowers are cylindrical with  5 hairy lobes that are twisted to the left in the bud instead of to the right  as  in  other  species. They  are  white,  regularly  tinged with pink, and borne in terminal clusters of 2 to 12. The fruit, in clusters of 3 to 10, is oblong, broad-ovoid or round, 1/2 to 1 in  (1.25-2.5 cm)  long; has  fairly  thin  but  tough,  purplish-red  skin  turning  dark-purple  or  closely  black  when  ripe; smooth, glossy;  enclosing  very  acid to  equally sweet,  often bitter, juicy, red or pink, juicy pulp, radiating flecks  of latex. There  may  be  2  to  8  small  brown  seeds.  The  Karanda  is common throughout much of India, Burma, and Malacca and dry areas of Ceylon; is rather commonly cultivated in  these 
CODEN (USA): JDDTAO areas as a hedge and for its fruit, and the fruit is marketed in villages. The karanda was initial fruite  in  the  Philippines in 1915.5  Fruits  are    rich  source  of  iron  and  vitamin  C, therefore,  ethnomedical  the  fruits  are  used  for  curing anemia, as  an astringent, antiscorbutic, and as a remedy for 
biliousness.  Its  leaf  decoction  is  used  in  contradiction  of fever,  diarrhea,  and  earache,  whereas  roots  help  as  a stomachic, vermifuge, remedy for itches, and insect repellent. 
1.2. Cultivation: - Karaunda  is  a  very  hardy  and  drought-tolerant  plant,  it thrives well throughout the tropical and subtropical climates. Heavy rainfall and waterlogged conditions are not desirable. It  can  be  grownup  on  a extensive  range  of  soils  including saline  and  sodic  soils. Karaunda  is  commonly  grown from seeds.  Vegetative  methods—air-layering  and  stem (hardwood)  cuttings  are  feasible  but  not  very  common. Fresh  seeds  are  sown  in  the  nursery  during  august  – September.  One-  year  old  seedlings  are  transplanted.  Air- layering is very successful in  Karaunda. It  can be performed at  the  beginning  of  the  monsoon.  Rooted  coatings  can  be separated 3 months after layering. Karaunda plants grown as a  protective  hedgerow  are  hardly  fertilized  .  Manuring, however, is used  as 10-15  kg well-rotten farmyard manure or  compost/plant  and  should be  applied  before  flowering. Irrigation:  The  water  requirement  of  Karonda is  very  low. Irrigation after planting and manuring is essential. Plantation once established does not need much water.  The fruits grow from  July  to  September  in  north  India.  Karaunda  fruits mature  100-110  days  after  fruit  set.  At  this  stage,  fruits develop  their  natural  color.  Fruits  ripen  after  this  stage, taking about 120 days (after fruit set) when they become soft and attain dark purple/maroon/ red color. After the packing of fruits, they are kept in shade. Fruits collected at maturity can be stored for a weak at room temperature. Fruits can be preserved/stored for 6 months in SO2 solution (2,000ppm) 
3. TRADITIONAL USES Carissa carandas  has been used from immemorial time to yet traditionally to treat different human ailments.  C. carandas is the best-known associate of the genus as it has been used as a old-style remedial shrub over thousands of centuries in the ayurvedic system of medicine as it is practiced on the Indian sub-continent. Thus, traditional uses of  C. carandas are well established.  The  root  is  credited  with  bitter,  stomachic, antidiarrhoeal,  and  antianthelmintic  properties.  The  ripe fruits  are  utilized  in  curries,  tarts,  puddings,  and  chutney. When  only  slightly  under-ripe,  they  are  made  into  jelly.1 Green, sour fruits are  made  into pickles in  India.  With skin and seeds removed and seasoned with sugar and cloves, they have been popular as a substitute for the apple in tarts. The unripe fruit is used therapeutically as an astringent. The ripe fruit is taken as an antiscorbutic and remedy for nausea. The fruits have been employed as  agents in  tanning and  dyeing British residents in  India undoubtedly favored  the  karanda as  being reminiscent  of  gooseberries.  Karanda  leaves have furnished food for the tussar silkworm. The leaf decoction is valued  in  cases  of  intermittent  fever,  diarrhea,  oral inflammation, Antibacterial activity, and earache.  14  A paste of the pulverized roots serves  as  a fly repellent. The root is employed as  a bitter  stomachic and  vermifuge  and it  is an ingredient  in  a  remedy  for  itches.  The  roots  of  Carissa carandas    contain  salicylic  acid  and  cardiac  glycosides causing  a  slight  decrease  in  blood  pressure.  The  white  or yellow wood is hard, smooth, and useful for molding spoons, combs,  household  utensils,  and  miscellaneous  products  of turnery. It is sometimes burned as fuel .
4. PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES Carissa  carandas    are  known  to  possess  a  wide  range  of phytochemicals in  the plant  parts  (roots,  leaves,  stem,  and fruit) that give the  plant tremendous medicinal value. These active  ingredients  give  the  plant  medicinal  value.  The pharmacological significance of  the plant has been assessed by various workers through in vitro and in vivo approaches. 
Anti-cancerous activity and antioxidant potentials: -  David M  and Karekalammanavar G et al:  Fruit extracts of C. carandas in chloroform, n-hexane, and methanol were tested for  their anticancer activity in lung cancer cells  and human ovarian  carcinoma  cells.  All  the  extracts  showed  excellent anticancer activity.  Besides, the  anticancer  and antioxidant potentials  of  the  extracts.  were  analyzed  for  unusual antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, dismutase, superoxide, glutathione-s-transferase,  and glutathione  in  MCF-7  cancer lines. This study exhibited important antioxidant activity and fortification of  cell  death  in the  MCF-7  cell line  pretreated with  C.  carandas  extracts.  Researchers  suggested  the  anti-cancer  potential  value  of  this  medicinal  plant  fruit  for  the future development of therapeutic drugs 22. Furthermore, in vitroanti Cancer studies showed that aqueous ethanolic fruit extract  (ESA)  induces cytotoxicity  at  800  μg  /  ml  in  HeLa cancer  cells  maintained  in  Dulbecco's  modified  Eagle's medium  (DMEM).  The  study  concluded  that  regular  daily intake Suggested  Diet Fruits with Reduced  Risk of Infection diseases and cancer 
ardiovascular activity: - Vohra M M and De N N et al.: The ethanolic extract of roots of C.  carandas exhibited  cardiotonic  activity and  lowered  the blood  pressure.  The  cardiac  activity  of  the  plant  has  been recognized  as  the  presence  of  water-soluble  glucosides known  as  odoroside.  The  dose  45  mg/kg,  i.p.  caused  a significant  (50.75%)  decrease  in  arterial  blood  pressure (P<0.001), and the frequency of heart rate was also reduced significantly. It was also found that the ethanol extract of the plant possess a potent hypotensive effect in normal rats.
Antimicrobial activity:  The ethanolic extract of  the fruit  has powerful antibacterial action  against  different  test  bacteria  like  B.  subtillis,  S. aureus, E. coli, S. faecalis, S. Typhimurium, and P. aeruginosa. Moreover,  the  ethanolic  extract  has  also  shown  extensive anticandidal action 
 Antibacterial activity: - S.  Verma,  H.S.  Chaudhary  et  al.: The  dichloromethane  and toluene extract  of  the  leaves of  C.  carandas  showed  better results  against  Staphylococcus  aureus  and  Klebsiella pneumonia.  The  fruit  extract  of  C.  carandas  in dichloromethane exhibited high antibacterial activity against E.  coli.  The  fruit  extract  in  ethyl  acetate  showed  the  best result against all the strains of bacteria.
