Effects of Carissa carandas Linn. Fruit, Pulp, Leaf, and Seed on Oxidation, Inflammation, Tyrosinase, Matrix Metalloproteinase, Elastase, and Hyaluronidase Inhibition

Materials and Methods
2.1. Plant Materials
Leaves and ripened fruits of C. carandas were collected from Samut Songkhram Province, Thailand during May 2017. All plant materials were identified and authenticated by Ms. Wannaree Charoensup, a botanist at the Herbarium of Faculty of Pharmacy, Chiang Mai University. A voucher specimen number 0023269 of C. carandas has been deposited in an Herbarium, Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Faculty of Pharmacy, Chiang Mai University. Seed and pulp of C. carandas were separated from the fruits. Each part of C. carandas, including leaf, seed, and pulp were sliced into small pieces and dried in a hot air oven (UF110, Memert, Germany) set at 50 °C until dryness. The dried C. carandas materials were then ground into a fine powder with a Moulinex mixer blender (Moulinex DB81 blender, Paris, France).
2.2. Chemical Materials
Ursolic acid, hyaluronidase from bovine testis (E.C. 3.2.1.3.5), MMP-1 from Clostridium histolyticum (ChC-E.C. 3.4.23.3), porcine pancreatic elastase (E.C. 3.4.21.36), N-[3-(2-furyl) acryloyl]-Leu-Gly-Pro-Ala, N-succinyl-Ala-Ala-Ala-p-nitroanilide, octylphenol ethoxylate (Triton X-100), alcian blue 8GX, hyaluronic acid, sodium phosphate, sodium chloride, glycerol, and sodium acetate were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Protein markers, 30% acrylamide/bis solution, 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8 solution, and 0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 solution were purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Richmond, CA, USA). Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and bromophenol blue were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ethanol, hydrochloric acid, ethyl acetate, methanol, n-hexane, acetic acid, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Labscan (Dublin, Ireland). HPLC grade ethanol was purchased from Carlo Erba Reagents (Cornaredo, Italy). Folin–Ciocalteu solution was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Gallic acid, quercetin, Trolox, 2,20-azino-bis-3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonic acid (ABTS), 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), 2,4,6-tri (2-pyridyl)-s-triazine (TPTZ) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), sodium carbonate, ferric chloride, ferrous sulfate, sodium acetate, aluminum trichloride, and potassium persulfate were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). RPMI-1640 medium, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), and penicillin-streptomycin were purchased from GIBCO Invitrogen (Grand Island, NY, USA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was obtained from Biochrom AG (Berlin, Germany). ELISA kits were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA).
2.3. Preparation of C. carandas Extracts
Fine powder of C. carandas fruit, leaf, seed, and pulp were sequentially macerated under continuous stirring by magnetic stirrer (multi-position magnetic stirrer with heater AM4, EOS Scientific Co. Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand) for 24 h at room temperature with n-hexane (3 cycles), ethyl acetate (3 cycles), and 95% ethanol (3 cycles), respectively. The solvent was then removed under vacuum by a rotary evaporator (N-1300S, EYELA, Tokyo, Japan). Finally, twelve C. carandas extracts were obtained, i.e., n-hexane fruit extract (HF), n-hexane leaf extract (HL), n-hexane seed extract (HS), n-hexane pulp extract (HP), ethyl acetate fruit extract (AF), ethyl acetate leaf extract (AL), ethyl acetate seed extract (AS), ethyl acetate pulp extract (AP), ethanolic fruit extract (EF), ethanolic leaf extract (EL), ethanolic seed extract (ES), and ethanolic pulp extract (EP). C. carandas extracts were kept in a tight container and refrigerated (4–8 °C) until further research.
2.4. Determination of Ursolic Acid Content by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
Each C. carandas extract was analyzed for ursolic acid content using Hitachi HPLC series L (Tokyo, Japan) with a UV detector (Hitachi L-7420, Tokyo, Japan) set at 210 nm. A stationary phase was reverse phase column, Luna 5.0 μ C18 (2) 100A (250 × 2.0 mm, 5 μm) (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). Mixture of HPLC-grade ethanol and DI water (90:10) was used as an isocratic mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. All samples were filtrated through 0.2 μm nylon filter (GNWP04700, Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) prior to the analyzation. The injection volume of each sample was 20 μL. Ursolic acid in a concentration range of 1–500 μg/mL was used to construct a linear regression equation. The ursolic acid content of each C. carandas extracts was calculated using the following equation:
y = 3475.3x + 5730.5 (R2 = 0.9997),	(1)where y was area under the curve (AUC) of ursolic acid peak which was detected around 9.3 min and x was a concentration of ursolic acid (g/mg extract). Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.5. Determination of Total Phenolic Content of C. carandas Extracts by Folin–Ciocalteu Method
The total phenolic content of each C. carandas extract was evaluated using Folin–Ciocalteu method regarding to Chaiyana et al. [10], which was modified from the method of Li et al. [11]. The results were presented as gallic acid equivalent (GAE), which was milligram gallic acid equivalent per gram of each C. carandas extracts. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.6. Determination of Total Flavonoid Content of C. carandas Extracts by Dowd Method
The flavonoid content of each C. carandas extract was determined using Dowd method according to [12]. The results were reported as quercetin equivalent (QE), which was milligram quercetin equivalent per gram of each C. carandas extracts. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.7. Determination of Antioxidant Activities of C. carandas Extracts
C. carandas extracts were investigated for antioxidant activities using ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assay, 2,2′-azino-bis-3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonic acid (ABTS) assay, and 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assay. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.7.1. Ferric Reducing Antioxidant Power (FRAP) Assay
The ferric reducing antioxidant power of each C. carandas extract was evaluated using the FRAP assay described by Chaiyana et al. [10], which was modified from Benzie and Strain’s method [13]. The absorbance was determined at 590 nm by a microplate reader Sp (220–1000 nm) (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech, Offenburg, Germany). Ferrous sulfate was also investigated and the resulting data were used to establish a standard curve. The results of reducing power were expressed as equivalent concentration (EC1) which represented the concentration of ferrous sulfate (mM) that exhibited an ability to reduce ferric ions (Fe3+) to ferrous ion (Fe2+) equivalent per g of C. carandas extracts.
2.7.2. 2,2′-Azino-Bis-3-Ethylbenzthiazoline-6-Sulphonic Acid (ABTS) Assay
The radical scavenging potential of each C. carandas extract was determined using an ABTS assay, as previously defined by Chaiyana et al. [10], which was adapted from Pellegrini et al. [14]. The absorbance was determined at 750 nm by a microplate reader Sp (220–1000 nm) (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech, Offenburg, Germany). Trolox was also analyzed and used for construction of a standard curve. The results were presented as a Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) which represented mM concentration of Trolox solution equivalent per g of C. carandas extracts.
2.7.3. 1,1-Diphenyl-2-Picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) Assay
The radical scavenging ability of each C. carandas extract was determined using the DPPH assay Chaiyana et al. [10], which was adapted from the method defined by Blois [15]. The absorbance was determined at 520 nm by a microplate reader Sp (220–1000 nm) (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech, Offenburg, Germany). The scavenging activity of each extract was calculated from the following equation:
DPPH inhibition (%) = {1 − [(A − B)/(C − D)]} × 100,	(2)where A is an UV absorbance of DPPH reagent with sample solution, B is an UV absorbance of the sample solution without DPPH reagent, C is an UV absorbance of DPPH reagent without sample solution, and D is an UV absorbance of the native solvents.
2.8. Determination of Anti-Aging Activities of C. carandas Extracts
C. carandas extracts were investigated for anti-aging activities via the determination of MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-9, elastase, and hyaluronidase inhibition. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.8.1. Determination of MMP-1 Inhibitory Activity by Spectrophotometric Method
The MMP-1 inhibitory activity of each C. carandas extract was evaluated using spectrophotometric methods adapted from Chaiyana et al. [16] and Thring et al. [17]. The inhibitory behavior against MMP-1 was calculated from the equation:
MMP-1 inhibition (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(3)where A and B are the UV absorbance of the mixture with and without test sample, respectively.
2.8.2. Determination of MMP-2 and MMP-9 Inhibition by Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
The MMP-2 and MMP-9 inhibitory activity of each C. carandas extract was evaluated using SDS-PAGE as previously stated in the study of Chaiyana et al. [16]. Among various subclones of Albino Swiss Mouse Embryo Fibroblasts (3T3), NIH/3T3 cell line, which expressed MMP genes [18], was used in the present study. NIH-3T3 cell line was commonly used instead of skin cells because it exhibited comparable results [19]. Besides, fibroblasts are present throughout the matrix and connective tissue of the body. Therefore, NIH-3T3 cell line has been previously used for studying the regulation of fibrillar collagen synthesis, cellular cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, inhibition of UV-induced skin photoaging, inhibition of MMPs, etc., of tested compounds or topical formulations [20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28]. Briefly, NIH/3T3 cell line were cultured in DMEM culture medium with 10.0% newborn calf serum, and 1.0% antibiotic–antimycotic (100×). Cells were incubated in a humidified incubator with a condition of 95.0% air and 5.0% CO2 at 37.0 °C. All medium in the culture flask (2.0 mL) was removed and replaced with an equal volume of fresh medium every day. On day 7 to day 10 of culture, the medium in the culture flask was collected and then replaced with equal volume of fresh medium. The collected medium was kept in the freezer for further study.
The SDS-PAGE was then performed using a method of Chaiyana et al. [16]. MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression levels were calculated using the Quality One 1-D Analysis program (Biorad, CA, USA). The inhibitions against MMPs were calculated from the equation:
MMPs inhibition (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(4)where A and B are the MMPs expression of NIH/3T3 cells treated with and without sample, respectively.
2.8.3. Determination of Elastase Inhibitory Activity by Spectrophotometric Method
The inhibitory activity of each C. carandas extract against elastase was determined using a spectrophotometric approach adapted from Chaiyana et al. [16] and Thring et al. [17]. The inhibitory activity against elastase was then calculated from the equation:
Elastase inhibition (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(5)where A and B are the UV absorbance of the mixture with and without test sample, respectively.
2.8.4. Determination of Hyaluronidase Inhibitory Activity by Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
The SDS-PAGE was carried out in accordance with a method previously defined by Chaiyana et al. [16]. Briefly, hyaluronidase was incubated with or without the extract at 37 °C for 48 h. The resulting mixture was then mixed with loading dye and loaded into each well of SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing 0.17% hyaluronic acid. After applying the voltage, the bands gently moved down and hyaluronidase was separated. Along with the enzyme separation, the digested hyaluronic acid by hyaluronidase was removed from the gel. Then the gel was washed, incubated in reaction buffer pH 5.0 for 16 h, soaked in staining buffer of Alcian blue for 1 h, and incubated in de-staining buffer until the protein marker showed up. Since hyaluronidase digested hyaluronic acid in the gel, the results would be detected as a clear area. In contrast, if a sample exhibited anti-hyaluronidase activity, its substrate would not be digested, and no clear area detected. The hyaluronidase expression was determined using the Quality One 1-D Analysis program (Biorad, CA, USA). The inhibitions against hyaluronidase were calculated from the equation:
Hyaluronidase inhibition (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(6)where A and B are the hyaluronic acid expression after treated with sample and without sample, respectively.
2.9. Anti-Inflammatory Activity Determination
C. carandas extracts were investigated for anti-inflammatory activities via the determination of NF-κB, IL-6, and TNF-α inhibition. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.9.1. Determination of NF-κB Expression by Western Blot Analysis
Firstly, the cell viability of U937 cells (American Type Culture Collection, VA, USA) was investigated using the MTT colorimetric method, which was slightly modified from the previous analysis of Anuchapreeda et al. [29]. U937 cell viability was calculated from the equation:
Cell viability (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(7)where A and B are the optical density of vehicle control and test sample, respectively. The concentration of each C. carandas extract showing 80% of cell viability was selected for the further immunoblotting study. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate. The level of NF-κB expression was measured using Western blotting, as defined previously by Chaiyana et al. [30]. Indomethacin, generally known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), was used as a positive control.
2.9.2. Determination of IL-6 and TNF-α Secretion by Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
IL-6 and TNF-α secretion was determined by ELISA according to the method of Chaiyana et al. [16]. Dexamethasone, generally known as a steroid used for anti-inflammation, was used as a positive control. On the other hand, negative control was the LPS-induced RAW 264.7 cells (American Type Culture Collection, VA, USA) treated without sample and vehicle control was the RAW 264.7 cells treated with nothing. The cell viability of RAW 264.7 cells was measured using the MTT colorimetric technique, which was modified from the methods previously defined by Chaiyana et al. [16] and Mueller et al. [31]. RAW 264.7 cells viability was then calculated from the equation:
Cell viability (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(8)where A is an optical density of vehicle control and B is an optical density of sample, positive control, or negative control. To limit variability due to cell density differences, IL-6 and TNF-secretions were standardized to MTT values [31]. The secretions of those cytokines from negative control, which were RAW 264.7 cells treated with only LPS, was described as 100%. Additionally, % inhibition against IL-6 and TNF-α was calculated by subtracting the cytokines secretion from 100%.
2.10. Anti-Tyrosinase Determination by Dopachrome Method
The anti-tyrosinase activity of each C. carandas extract was determined using DOPAchrome method regarding to a method of Momtaz et al. [32] which was adapted from Curto et al. [33] and Nerya et al. [34]. As substrates, L-tyrosine and L-DOPA were used. As a positive control, kojic acid was used. The inhibitory activity against tyrosinase was calculated from the equation:
Tyrosinase inhibition (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(9)where A and B are the absorbance of the mixture with and without test sample, respectively. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.11. Cytotoxicity of C. carandas Extracts in Human Keratinocyte (Hacat) Cells by MTT Colorimetric Technique
The cell viability of sample-treated HaCaT cells (American Type Culture Collection, VA, USA) was calculated using the MTT colorimetric procedure, which was modified from the methods of Colombo et al. [35] and Anuchapreeda et al. [29]. The viability of HaCaT cells was investigated using the MTT colorimetric method. HaCaT cell viability was calculated from the equation:
Cell viability (%) = (1 − A/B) × 100,	(10)where A and B are the optical density of vehicle control and test sample, respectively. The concentration of each C. carandas extract showing 80% of cell viability was selected for the further immunoblotting study. Every experiment was carried out in triplicate.
2.12. Statistical Analysis
All data were provided in the form of a mean ± standard deviation (S.D.). Individual differences were assessed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), which was supplemented by Tukey’s post-hoc analysis. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001 indicated statistical significance.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. C. carandas Extracts
The yields of each C. carandas extracts are shown in Figure 1. n-Hexane and ethanolic extracts were a semisolid mass. On the other hand, all ethyl acetate extracts were solid powder. The color of each extract depended on the C. carandas materials, e.g., the extracts from the leaf, seed, pulp, and fruit part had a dark green, yellow–brown, dark purple, and dark brown color, respectively. Interestingly, ethanolic extracts showed the significantly highest yields in fruit, pulp, and leaf part of C. carandas, whereas the significantly highest yield of the extracts from seed part was obtained from the n-hexane extracts. The likely explanation was due to the high content of fatty acid, i.e., palmitic acid and stearic acid, in the seed part [4] but high content of phenolic compounds in the others [36,37]. Therefore, it was likely that C. carandas fruit, pulp, and leaf contained polar phytoconstituents which were extracted well by polar solvent. In contrast, the C. carandas seed contained nonpolar phytoconstituents which was extracted well by nonpolar solvent.
Among twelve C. carandas extracts, PE showed the highest yield which was 27.3% w/w. Besides, the pulp part yielded the highest extract amount in all extracted solvent used. The likely explanation was because an edible pulp is rich with several bioactive compounds and mineral contents.
3.2. Ursolic Acid Content of C. carandas Extracts
The ursolic acid content of C. carandas extracts are shown in Figure 2. The results indicated that ethyl acetate was the most suitable solvent for ursolic acid extraction since the ursolic acid contents were significantly highest in all ethyl acetate extracts, including the extract from fruit, leaf, pulp, and seed part (p < 0.05). Although the previous ursolic acid solubility study noted that ursolic acid was well dissolved in ethanol (solubility = 16.808 ± 0.824 mg/mL), followed by ethyl acetate (solubility = 6.857 ± 0.359 mg/mL) and n-hexane (solubility = 0.471 ± 0.064 mg/mL) [38,39], in this study it was revealed that ethyl acetate extracts contained a significantly higher amount of ursolic acid compared to ethanolic extracts. The reasons were due to a subsequential extraction process. Since the C. carandas dried powder was macerated in ethyl acetate before ethanol, ursolic acid was therefore extracted and existed in the ethyl acetate extract, leading to lower ursolic acid content detected in ethanolic extracts.
Among various parts of C. carandas extracted using ethyl acetate, AL contained the significantly highest ursolic acid (411.8 mg/g extract), followed by AP (256.34 mg/g extract), AF (253.32 mg/g extract), and AS (3.4 mg/g extract), respectively (p < 0.05). The HPLC chromatograms of ethyl acetate extracts from different part of C. carandas are shown in Figure 3. The major peaks detected in chromatograms of C. carandas ethyl acetate extracts were at the retention time ranging from 9.228 to 9.409 min which were close to that of ursolic acid (9.341 min). Therefore, it could be concluded that ursolic acid was a main abundant compound in C. carandas extracts.
Anti-Inflammatory Activity of C. carandas Extracts
Inflammation underlies a broad range of pathological and physiological processes [65]. NF-κB is released and translocated to the nucleus after the phosphorylation of the inhibitory IκB, and consequently regulates the expression of many genes involved in inflammatory signaling, cell proliferation, and cell apoptosis. Because the nuclear factor NF-κB signaling pathway has long been considered to be a model of proinflammatory signaling, NF-κB inhibitors may be useful as anti-inflammatory agents [66]. In addition, the inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and others), which are primarily produced by macrophages and mast cells, play a number of functions in the inflammatory response, including stimulating endothelial cells and leukocytes, as well as triggering the acute-phase response [65].
The anti-inflammatory activities of C. carandas extracts indicated that several C. carandas extracts displayed potent anti-inflammatory activities, as shown in Figure 7. The IC20 values (Table 2) represented the concentrations at 80% of viable U937 or RAW 264.7 cells. Each C. carandas extract at IC20 value was used in the assessment of anti-inflammatory activity. n-Hexane extracts were the safest extracts since they exhibited the highest value of IC20 which were greater than 250 µg/mL in U937 cells and 100 µg/mL in RAW 264.7 cells. Except for the leaf part, ethyl acetate extracts had greater effects on U937 and RAW 264.7 cells viabilities than ethanolic extracts.
