Karonda: A Medicinal Plant with Immense Economic Potentials

Plant Description of Karonda
Carissa carandas is an evergreen deciduous small to big shrub height 2-4 m tall. The stem is rich in white
latex and the branches contain sharp spines. Flowers are small, diameter of flower 3-5 cm, with white colour. The
fruit is a berry, which is formed in clusters of 3-10 fruits. fruits are pinkish white and become red to dark purple
when ripe. Ripe fruit colour from white, green and pinkish red depending on the genotype. Flowering month
January-February and fruits mature in May-June. Fruits are generally harvested at immature stage for vegetable
purpose, fully ripen fruits are consumed fresh or processed. The leaves are oblong and conical, 4-6 inch long and
2-3 inch wide, green on the top and brown below. Flowers: White or yellowish flowers are found in groups. Fruit:
The are avoid with 5-1 hard angles curving upwards, glabrous with five to seven wings, woody and fibrous. Bark:
The bark is smooth gray. The bark is thick.
Propagation:
Carissa carandas propagated by sexual and vegetative propagation. Experimental add India has shown
that cuttings from mature plants might not root at all; 20% of hardwood cuttings from trimmed hedges have rooted
in November but not when planted earlier. Cuttings from nursery stock gave best results: 10% rooted in late
September; 20% in early October; 30% in late October; and 50% in early November. altogether cases, cuttings
were pre-treated with auxin at 500 ppm in 50% alcohol. The maximum number of roots, rooting percentage and
survival percentage was recorded under 8000 ppm concentration of IBA and the minimum rooting percentage
was observed under control treatments (Deepak et al. 2015). IBA is that the most promising phytohormone
inducing rooting quickly. Exogenous application of IBA accelerates the speed of rooting, increase final rooting
percentage and number of roots. Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) is the maximum widely used root promoting
Planting:
Pits of 60 cm x60cm x 60cm size are dug and full of natural manure and soil, in a 1:2 ratio. The planting
distance for fence/ hedge need to be 1-1.5 meter, requiring 300-400 plant life for planting alongside the boundary
of 1 hectare field. If a one kind planting is to be raised, a planting distance of 2 m x 2 m need to be enough.
Manure and Fertilizers:
Karanda plant life grown as defensive hedge are hardly ever manured or fertilized. Manuring, however,
is beneficial. Otherwise, its plant life slowly gets exhausted after taking 2 year and begin displaying signs and
symptoms of die back. Therefore, 15-20 kg well-rotten farmyard manure or compost/plant to be implemented
earlier than flowering.
Irrigation:
Water requirement of Karonda could be very low. Irrigation after planting and manuring is essential.
However, if there's no rain for the duration of the improvement of fruit, one irrigation can be given. This will
boom the fruit size.
Training and Pruning:
Regular plantations of Karonda may be trained on single or double stem. Therefore, extra undesirable
shoots or laterals are eliminated from time-to-time to present the plant preferred shape. Suckers springing up from
diseased dried twigs must be eliminated.
Weed Management:
After irrigation, weeding should be done by which development of plant is done properly. It is necessary
to weeding after every irrigation in Karanda.
Insect and Disease Control
Leaf eating caterpillars: monocrotophos 2ml/l.
Fruit fly bactrocera dorsalis: Sanitation.
Twig dieback Diplodia natalensis: Pruning.
Stem canker Dithiorella sp.: Effected branches remove and burn.
Anthracnose: black brown lesions, use copper-based fungicides copper oxide.
Karonda as Medicinal Trees
The karonda fruit is an astringent, antiscorbutic and as a treatment for biliousness and beneficial for
therapy of anemia. In traditional medicine the fruit is used to improve female libido and to remove worms from
the intestinal tract. The fruits have anti-microbial and antifungal properties and its juice used to clean old wounds
which have become infected. The juice may be carried out to the pores and skin to alleviate any pores and skin
problems. Traditionally Karonda has been used to deal with anorexia and insanity. A leaf decoction of Karonda
is used towards fever, diarrhoea, and earache. The roots function a stomachic, vermifuge, treatment for itches and
insect repellent.
Health Benefits of Karanda
The complete plant has medicinal values. Carissa carandas flowers are used to remedy diverse diseases.
It is very high sources in iron, vitamin C, vitamin A, phosphorus and calcium. Anemic disease is controlled by
iron found in Karonda. Vitamin C is found in high amounts in Karonda. By which scurvy disease is controlled.
Karanda fruit has an Anthelmintic effect withinside the Body which expels the Parasitic Worms. It eliminates
impurities from the blood. Eating Karonda mature fruit removes the disease of anorexia. Epilepsy disease is 
 AgriCos e-Newsletter (ISSN: 2582-7049) 02 (02) February 2021
 www.agricosemagazine.com 86
controlled by the use of Karonda leaves. Abdominal pains, dysuria, menorrhagia and ulcer are controlled using
the root of Karonda. It is fine in decreasing the blood sugar quantity in curing Diabetes.
Other Uses
The ripe fruit emits a gummy latex when it is cooked, but yields a rich crimson juice which clears when
it is cooled, so that is used a fresh cooling drink in warm weather. Usually, the fruit is pickled earlier than it
receives ripened. Ripe Karonda fruit carries excessive amount of pectin consequently it's also utilized in making
jelly, jam, squash, syrup, tarts and chutney. 