Karonda, Carissa Carandas – Fruit Plant (wildroots)

About Karonda
Karonda is botanically known as Carissa carandas from the family Apocynaceae. Karonda is a medium-sized, thorny shrub. It has a greenish white bark on young shoots and greyish brown on mature stems. The spines are straight and 1-3 cm long. Its leaves are 2-3 cm long and shiny green above and a dull green shade below. Old leaves keep shedding throughout the year.

Very attractive when in fruit, the plant is often grown in the garden both as an ornamental and for its fruit in tropical and subtropical areas.

It is rich in iron, vitamin C, vitamins A, calcium, and phosphorus. It is antiscorbutic and very useful for the cure of anemia. Karonda fruits are used in many ayurvedic formulations and are useful to their nutritional values. The extract of the root is used for Chest pain. The extract of leaves is used for fever(there is no scientific belief for this). 

Karonda Planting And Care
Sunlight
Karonda grows well in bright direct sunlight.
Soil
Soil should be well drain and porus.
Watering
Poke your finger/plain small stick into the soil to check the moisture.
Apply 1 cup (Approx. 50 ml) water when the top soil (3-4 inch) in pot feels dry to touch.
Apply water probably in the morning or evening time.
Do not overwater the plant.
As a rule of thumb, water the plant thoroughly in the summer and reduce watering in winter and rainy season.
Application of fertilizer
Before application of fertilizer loosen the topsoil without disturbing the roots of the plant so it can uptake the nutrients and moisture.
During the main growing season (January-March) feed the plant with organic fertilizer once a month.
Apply water immediately after application of fertilizer.
Plant Protection
Remove dead, infected or damaged plant parts and discard them away from the plants.
For any insect attack or disease, you can use Neem oil, Eucalyptus oil or Citrus oil spray for primary treatment.
Don’ts
Do not over water the plant especially when pot does not have drainage holes.
keep away from the AC Vents.
Do not apply water on plant leaves.
Initial care for 1-2 weeks after receiving plant at your location.
Check the moisture in the soil before watering it.
Poke your finger into the soil, if dry then apply water.
Keep the plant in indirect light.
Do not repot immediately after receiving it.
Special feature of Karonda
It is a hardy, drought-tolerant plant that thrives well in a wide range of soils.

Ornamental uses of Karonda
Used for fencing and hedge purpose.