Carissa carandas L. – phyto-pharmacological review

Objectives
Carissa carandas is an evergreen thorny shrub (Apocynaceae family), commonly, known as karonda. It has small berry-shaped fruits, used as additive in many pickles or as a spice in northern India.

Methods
The present review covers the literature survey from 1968 to 2020. The data have been collected from various journals, books, thesis and some of the electronic search via Internet-based information such as PubMed, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, EBSCO, online electronic journals, SpringerLink, Wiley and Ayush.

Key findings
From literature survey, it has been found that the herbal drug contains wide variety of flavonoids, phenolic acids, steroids, volatile oils, lignans, alkaloids, polysaccharides and so on. These phytochemicals exhibit a range of pharmacological activities including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, antimicrobial and antifungal properties.

Conclusions
This current review offers primary data for further research work. The in-vitro evaluations as well as in-vivo models/experiments have provided a biosynthetic observation for its various ethno-pharmacological uses and even pharmacological properties. This review would provide all valuable information which will be beneficiary to conduct some important pharmacokinetic and toxicological research works on human models with respect to ensure the effects of active ingredients in the body and even to validate its safety issues in clinical aspects.

Introduction
Carissa carandas is an evergreen thorny shrub belongs to Apocynaceae family, which is commonly known as karonda. It has small berry-shaped fruits, used as additive in many pickles or as a spice in northern India. It is drought-resistant plant that can be grown in a wide range of different types of soils. Approximately more than 25 species of genus Carissa are known, out of which five species are native to India. It is commonly used to make ledge for orchards. It has been found that the fruit is the richest source of iron, vitamin C and pectin. Even it is used as an ingredient in most of the edible preparations such as jam, jelly, squash and syrup. The demand of the plant has been increased tremendously in the market as it contains antiscorbutic property and found very beneficiary effect in the treatment of anaemia. It has been utilised in many ayurvedic preparations. Root extract is used in chest pain. The leaf extracts are used in the treatment of fever. The fruits are richest source of thiamine, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, pyridoxine, biotin and folic acid.[1]

Occurrence, cultivation and collection
It is an evergreen shrub and grows in hilly region of India including Himalayas and even Western Ghats at an altitude of 300–1800 m. It is also found naturally in Malaysia and South Africa. In India, apart from higher altitudes it grows very well in other parts such as Bihar, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh states. The plant can be grown successfully in tropical and subtropical climate regions. It grows well in acrid climate at higher temperature. The plant growth gets much affected with heavy rainfall and even waterlogged regions. The climate with high frost and snowfall temperature is not recommended for the fruit development. The plant is grown very well on a wide variety of soil types, such as sandy loams, laterite, alluvial sand and calcareous soil. Sometimes it grow very well in stony and rocky surface with less fertile soils. Alluvial sandy loamy soil with proper drainage provides higher yield and optimum growth of the plant. It requires optimum range of pH from 5.0 to 8.0 for their better growth. The air-layering was performed in between June and July. After air-layering, the plants were removed in September and planted in polythene bags. They were ready for planting after 6–7 months of this process. Before planting, the levelling of soil must be required to remove all the older plants from the field. The planting should be done in the month of June–July. The pits must be filled with equal proportion of farmyard manure. For the proper establishment of the plant, watering is done immediately after the planting. The regular irrigation is required at a regular time interval for the better nourishment. It requires balanced proportion of fertiliser including nitrogen, phosphorus and potash. Initially, the branches and stems of the plants were tender and weak, so they required support for their growth. Unwanted stems and branches should be trained and pruned to give a definite shape and enhance the growth of the trunk. Training of the plant should be done only in the initial two years. The plant start bearing flowers in December–March, and the fruit gets matured in the month of April–June. The maturity of fruits can be analysed on the basis of colour change. Harvesting can be done for 3–4 times as all the fruits cannot get matured at one time.

The fruits are then stored for 3–4 days under room temperature.[2]

Different species – Carissa grandiflora, Carissa bispinosa, Carissa edulis, Carissa ovata[4]
It is commonly grown from seeds. The fresh seeds are sown in nursery during August–September. One-year-old seedlings are transplanted when seedling propagation is done. Seedling height and stem diameter increased with increasing concentration of gibberellic acid. The best treatment for promoting early growth was gibberellic acid at 1000 parts per million (ppm).[1]

Phytochemistry
The chemical constituents of C. carandas are flavonoids, steroids, carbohydrates, alkaloids, volatile oils and others as described in Table 2 and Figure 8. It has been analysed that pentacyclic oleanane triterpenes, β-amyrin, methyl oleanolate, oleanolic acid, ursane triterpene and ursolic acid, are isolated mainly from the roots of C. carandas.[
    Antioxidant, antibacterial and cytotoxic activities
Dichloromethane and methanolic extracts of both ripened and unripened karonda fruits have been studied for antibacterial, antioxidant and cytotoxic activities to promote the health safety, where it has been found that the ripened dichloromethane and methanol extracts were containing preferable antioxidant activities rather than unripened. And even ripened karonda fruits also possessed antibacterial activity with no cytotoxicity to normal cells.[35]

Anticonvulsant activity
Ethanolic root extract of C. carandas (ERCC) produced significant anticonvulsant on both electrically and chemically induced seizures. At a dose of 100, 200 and 400 mg/kg, i.p., ERCC was evaluated for anticonvulsant activity against maximal electroshock-induced seizures, and pentylenetetrazole-, picrotoxin-, bicuculline- and N-methyl-dl-aspartic acid-induced seizures in mouse model. Results revealed that ERCC at a dose range of 100–400 mg/kg produced marked reduction in the time duration between seizures induced by maximal electroshock. The doses of 200 and 400 mg/kg showed complete protection of animals from pentylenetetrazole-induced tonic–clonic seizures and also considerably delayed the onset of tonic–clonic seizures induced by using picrotoxin and N-methyl-dl-aspartic acid. However, the root extract showed no significant effect on seizures induced by using bicuculline.[36]

Hyperlipidemic activity
Aqueous extract of C. carandas has been investigated for lipid-lowering activity in egg yolk-induced hyperlipidemic rats. The researchers concluded that the extract exhibited a significant reduction in body weight, cholesterol, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in model-induced rats. All the results were compared with the standard drug, atorvastatin. Even the histopathological changes in high-cholesterol diet have been reduced significantly with the extract.[37]

Hepatoprotective activity
Methanolic extract of C. carandas leaves showed hepatoprotective activity using carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatotoxicity in albino rats. Biochemical parameters including total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, SGPT and SGOT were analysed along with histopathological studies. All the obtained results were compared with silymarin-treated animals.[38]

Haemolytic activity
Researcher conducted the GC-MS analysis of n-hexane root extract and examined the antioxidant and haemolytic properties. Antioxidant activity was determined using different assays such as total phenol content (TPC), total flavonoid content (TFC), reducing power, DPPH and antioxidant activity in linoleic acid system. From the experiments, it was analysed that the herb extract contained 1.79–4.35 GAE mg/g dry extract of TPC value, 1.91–3.76 CE mg/g dry extract of TFC value, 12.53–84.82 % IC50 of DPPH and also 41.0–89.21% of % peroxidation inhibition in linoleic acid system. Moreover, the antioxidant potential of extract was evaluated by using corn oil, considered as the oxidation substrate. Alterations in the oxidation reaction were determined by measuring the conjugated diene, conjugated triene and free fatty acid. The cytotoxicity parameters assessed against human red blood cells and the percentage of lysis were analysed in the range of 1.01–6.01%. From the above analysis, it has been concluded that the plant may be utilised as one of the potential sources in the form of antioxidant agents in many food industries.[39]

Antibacterial and antifungal activity
Mishra evaluated in-vitro antibacterial and antifungal activity of methanol and petroleum ether extracts of both unripe roots and fruits of C. carandas using disc diffusion method and turbidity method. The disc diffusion method was assessed using Staphylococcus aureus, Bacilus pumulis and Vibriochlorae bacterial strains, whereas the turbidity method was assessed using C. albicans, A. oryzae and T. azoli fungus strains. All the results were compared with standard drug ciprofloxacin (antibacterial activity) and fluconazole (antifungal activity).[40]

Anti-ulcer activity
The anti-ulcer activity had examined with different extracts of C. carandas using petroleum ether, chloroform, alcohol applied on different models using acetic acid-induced chronic gastric ulcer, pylorus ligation and even ethanol-induced acute gastric ulcer, respectively. Oral administration of 500 mg/kg of all extracts would have enhanced the healing of acetic acid-induced chronic gastric ulcers (P < 0.05). Among all the extracts, alcoholic extract showed significant activity in pylorus ligation and stress-induced ulcer. It is concluded that the alcoholic extract of the plant would possess highly potent effect when compared to other extracts.[41]

Anti-inflammatory activity
The study revealed the ethyl acetate and methanol leaf extracts exhibited anti-inflammatory activity. Carrageenan-induced hind paw oedema model was used to analyse the activity in Wistar albino rats. The methanolic extract was found to be more potential than the ethyl acetate leaf extract.[42]

Diuretic activity
The methanolic extract of C. carandas leaves was evaluated for neuropharmacological as well as diuretic activities. The present work revealed that the extract has the potency to potentiate the pentobarbital-induced sleeping time in mice. Diuretic effect of the plant was determined by Na+/K+ excretion ratio, in which at 200 and 400 mg/kg, it was found to have 1.46 and 1.43 when compared with furosemide (1.48).[43]

Proteolytic activity
Banu SH et al reported the proteolytic activity of the plant along with Tabernaemontana divaricate L. The protease enzyme was extracted out from the both plants using freeze–thaw method. The crude enzyme, protease, has been prepared from the latex of Tabernaemontana divaricata L. and C. carandas L. by repeated freeze–thaw method using centrifugation for evaluating the role of enzyme in haemostasis. It has been found that the enzyme possessed dose-dependent caseinolytic, fibrinogenolytic, blood and even plasma clot activities.[44]

The detailed ethnomedicinal and pharmacological activity of C. carandas Linn. information has been discussed in Tables 3 and 4 and Figure 9.

Conclusion
The utilisation of herbs as an complementary medicine is becoming prevalent and attaining worldwide popularity and demand. The present literature survey on C. carandas covers all the informative data which play an important role for further research analysis. Moreover, for further researches, there should be focus on the specific cellular and molecular targets of various constituents of the plant which exerts specific therapeutic actions. The clinical potency and the toxicological studies of C. carandas are required to get explored and documented. There is a need of proper standardisation of herbal crude drugs, which always be a part of controversial studies. Thus, secondary metabolites present in the extract must be identified and characterised properly with the applications of modern techniques. In addition to this, proper validation of Carissa carandas extract is required to study the detailed relationship related to herb–drug and food–drug interactions. However, more advanced experimental research including DNA microarrays and so on would be added which may help for searching out the more potential drugs from the natural origin.