Carissa carandas L. (indiabiodiversity)

Description
Armed shrubs, latex milky, dichotomously branched, spines forked at apex, 4.5 cm. Leaves 6 x 3.5 cm, elliptic-oblong, apex obtuse or emarginate, subcoriaceous; petiole to 0.5 cm. Cymes axillary and terminal, corymbose, puberulus; flowers white; calyx 5-lobed, 2.5 mm ,ovate, , aristate; corolla hypocrateriform, tube 2 cm, pubescent, twisted, 7 x 3 mm, ovate, pubescent; stamens 2.5 mm, obtuse, mucronate, sessile; ovary 1 mm, stigma fusiform, twisted. Berry 2.5 cm across, black when ripe.
Tree
The plant is a sprawling semi-vine shrub about 1.5 to 2 m in height. Leaves are 1-3 inches long, very dark green, shiny and opposite and they have large spines. If the leaves or stems are injured, the white milky sap is seen, which is characteristic of this group of plants. The flowers are small, fragrant, white in colour and about 3.5 inches long, with rose colour stalk. The fruits are small and purplish to black in colour. The fruit size is variable, but most fruits are about 3.5 inch in diameter with a few seeds. Fruits usually occur in clusters somewhat resembling large purple grapes

A large shrub having paired (sometime branched) stout, spreading spines up to 2 inch long. Leaves oblong, distinctly nerved. Flowers scented, in corymbose cyme. Fruit is berry. Mostly planted, sometime found as escape in the forest
Flower
In terminal or axillary, 2 to 3-chotomous cymes;white, showy. Flowering from March-April.

Fruit
An ellipsoid berry; tinged red, ripening dark blue; seeds 4, ellipsoid, glabrous. Fruiting April onwards.

Field tips
Bark yellowish-brown. Young fruits green coloured and tinged with red. Latex white.

Leaf Arrangement
Opposite-decussate

Leaf Type
Simple

Leaf Shape
Obovate or oblanceolate

Leaf Apex
Obtuse or emarginate

Leaf Base
Acute to cuneate

Leaf Margin
Entire

Uses and Management
Uses
System of Medicines Used In
Ayurveda
Ayurveda
Folk medicine
Folk medicine
Siddha
Siddha
Ripe fruits are taken raw or dried. The mature fruits are harvested for pickles. It contains pectin and accordingly is a useful ingredient in jelly, jam, syrup and chutney.
Nutritional Value
Energy 46 kcal; carbohydrate 12.2gm; protein 0.4 gm; total fat 0.13 gm; dietary fibres 4.6 gm; vitamin C 13.3 mg; vitamin E 1.2 mg; sodium 2 mg; potassium 85 mg; calcium 8 mg; Magnesium 6 mg; phosphorus 13 mg; zinc 0.1mg and small amounts of beta-carotene per 100 gm of fruit pulp