A REVIEW ON CARISSA CARANDAS

INTRODUCTION
Carissa congesta Wight (syn. Carissa carandas Auct., formerly extensively shown as C. carandas L.), belongs to
the dogbane family Apocynaceae [1], found to be widely distributed all over India. The shrub is generally known
as karonda (Devanagari कर ोंदा), karamardaka (Sanskrit), Koromcha (Bengali), Bengal currant or Christ’s thorn
(South India), vakkay (Telugu), kilaakkaai (Tamil), and Karja tenga (Asam). Its fruits have been berry-sized,
which are commonly used as a flavor or additive to Indian pickles and spices. Karonda has well appetizer
activity, and the fruit is pickled before it gets ripened. Ripe karonda fruit contains high quantity of pectin thus it's
also utilized in producing jelly, jam, squash, syrup, cocottes and chutney, which are of good demand in foreign
market [2]. Karonda bushes are also capable for hedging in the habitat gardens, and are occasionally grown as a
cosmetic manufactory due to its beautiful cherry-suchlike fruits. The plant is a hardy, drought-tolerant in nature
that can be cultured in a wind range of soils. The species has been utilized as a conventional remedial plant over 
thousands of years in the Ayurvedic, Unani, and Homoeopathic system of medication. Traditionally, entire plant
and its parts were utilized in the treatment of various disorders. Its fruits are consumed to cure liver dysfunction,
to reduce fever, to minimise the decomposition of blood while roots are utilized to enhance digestion. Fruits have
heavy source of iron and vitamin C, therefore, ethnomedically the fruits are beneficial for curing anemia, as an
astringent, antiscorbutic, and as a drug for biliousness. Its leaf decoction is applied against fever, diarrhea, and
ear ache, whereas roots used as a stomachic, vermifuge, medication for itches, and insect repellent [3].
PLANT DESCRIPTION
Carissa carandas is an evergreen deciduous, generally 2-4 m tall plant of the family Apocynaceae. Its stem
consists of white latex, with sharp spines on branches; the leaves are oblong and conical with 4-6 inch long and
2-3 inch wide, green in colour on the top and brown below. The plant have white colored flowers, sized 3-5 cm
in diameter, the fruit is a berry, which is formed in bunches of 3-10 fruits, with 5-1 hard angles hooked upwards,
glabrous with five to seven wings, woody, and fibrous. The fruit shape is globose to broad ovoid containing
several seeds. Fresh fruits are pinkish white, while ripe fruit turn into red to dark purple. Ripe fruit color differs
from white, green and pinkish red subject to the genotype. Seed 3-5 per fruit, blackish brown in color, flat,
eleptical, and light in weight. Flowering starts in the month of January- February and fruits mature in May- June.
Fruits are generally collected at the immature stage for vegetable purpose, fully ripen fruits are used up fresh or
processed [4].

ORIGIN AND DISTRIBUTION
C. carandas is patented near the Himalayas; by certain botanists place the fruit’s origin to Java. The plant is
originate to be distributed in the Himalayas at the heights of 300-1800 m, in the Siwalik Hills, the Western
Ghats, in Nepal, Afghanistan, India, Sri Lanka, Java, Myanmar, Malaysia, Australia, Pakistan, and South
Africa. In India it is cultivated in the states of Bihar, Maharashtra, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and in the Western Ghats. In Maharashtra, the main area under this crop is
distributed in sub mountain area such as Ratnagiri, Kolhapur, and Pune district [5]. Some of the important
cultivated Carissa species besides C. carandas L. includes: Carissa grandiflora DC, Carissa bispinosa Desf.,
Carissa spinarum DC, Carissa ovata, Carissa edulis Vahl., Carissa inermis Vahl. Syn., Carissa macrophylla,
Carissa paucinervia D.C., and C. spinarum L. Syn., Carissa diffusa, C. carandas and C. spinarum are native to
India (Index Kewensis, 1985-190) while C. grandiflora isnative to South Africa [3].
Anti-diabetic activity
Gaurav et al. [20] estimated the influence of the aqueous extract of C. carandas on alloxan produced and
control Wister rats, and was found that the doses of 500 and 1000 mg/kg of the aqueous extract significantly
(p<0.05) lower the blood glucose levels of alloxan produced diabetic Wistar rats at 4, 8 and 24 hrs. The workers
concluded that the plant extract doses had both significant (p<0.05) hypoglycemic as well as anti- hyperglycemic
effects.
Further, Itankar et al. [21] demonstrated anti-hyperglycemic action of the plant by showing methanol extract, and
its fractions in alloxan prompted diabetic rats [21]. The employees reported that the alcoholic (methanol) extract
and its ethyl acetate soluble portion have suggestively hypoglycemic effect at dose level of 400 mg/kg po after 24
hrs, as linked to diabetic control. Polyphenol constituent of alcoholic (methanol) extract and its ethyl acetate
soluble portion were founded to be 15.8±1.2 mg and 18.55±0.34 mg (gallic acid equivalent/g extract), whereas,
flavonoid content of both the extracts had been 2.92±0.03 mg and 1.534±0.30 mg (rutin equivalent/g extract)
respectively. The researchers determined that the antihyperglycemic activity of ethyl acetate fraction over
methanol extract is due to its partial purification achieved by fractionation which caused in increase in degree of
polymerization, and segregation of secondary metabolites.
Anti-convulsant activity
Anti-convulsant action of the ethanolic root extract of C. carandas at the doses of 100, 200 and 400 mg/ kg, i.p.
had been studied by Hegde etal. [7] on electrically, and chemically produced seizures. The extract at dose of
100-400 mg/ kg was significantly downgraded the duration of seizures produced by electroshock. Still, only 200
and 400 mg/ kg of the extract granted protection (25 and 50, respectively) on the mice. The same doses also
defended animals from pentylenetetrazole- convinced tonic seizures and significantly delayed the attack of tonic
seizures induced by picrotoxin, and N-methyl-dl-aspartic acid. The extract had no action on bicucullineproduced seizures. The authors concludedanti- convulsant activity of the ethanolic root extract ofC. carandas via
non-specific mechanisms, since the extract degraded the time of seizures induced by maximal electroshock as
well as decrease the latency of seizures induced by pentylenetetrazole, and picrotoxin.
Analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-pyretic activities
Bhaskar and Balakrishnan [22], tested significant analgesic, anti- inflammatory and antipyretic effect of
alcoholic and aqueous extracts from C. carandas roots in rat models. The alcoholic and aqueous extracts from
roots of C. carandas were showed significant (p<0.01) analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic activity at the doses of 100 and 200 mg/ kg body weight. The researchers observed large percentage of reduction of
abdominal contraction (72.67) ethanol extracts of C. carandas at a dose of 100 mg/ kg body weight in analgesic
effect. Further, the ethanol and aqueous extracts of C. carandas were downgraded the formation of edema
produced by carrageenan after 2 hrs, significantly.
Further, Hati et al. [23] estimated anti-inflammatory, and anti-pyretic capabilities of the methanol extract of C.
carandas L. leaf. The extract at the dose of 200 mg/ kg body weight exposed maximum destruction of
inflammation, i.e., 72.10, 71.90 and 71.80 at the end of 3 hrs with histamine, dextran and carrageenan produced
rat paw edema respectively. The anti-pyretic effect was estimated by Brewer’s yeast produced pyrexia in albino
rats. The extract at the dose of 100 and 200 mg/ kg .o. showed significant anti-pyretic effect.
Additionally, Anupama et al.[24] investigated that the anti-inflammatory effect alcoholic (methanol) extract of
dried fruit on carrageenan produced hind paw edema in albino rats. C. carandas had been extracted with
petroleum ether, followed by methanol extraction. The methanol extracts of the dried fruits of C. carandas was
given orally to the rats and show substantial action (p ≤0.05) when matched with the control group.
Hepatoprotective activity
Hegde and Joshi [11], studied hepatoprotective effect of root ethanolic extract of C. carandas with CCl4 and
paracetamol produced hepatotoxicity by decreasing the effect of serum marker enzymes, bilirubin and lipid
peroxidation, and significant raise in the degrees of u that was ric acid, glutathione, super oxide dismutase,
catalase, and protein in a dose dependent manner verified by the drop in the total weight of the liver and
histopathological examination. Whereas, Bhaskar and Balakrishnan[25] were reported hepatoprotective action of
the ethanol, and aqueous extracts of roots of C. carandas against ethanol produced hepatotoxicity in rats. The
ethanol and aqueous extracts at a dose level of 100 mg/ kg and 200 mg/ kg have significant hepatoprotection by
decreasing serum transaminase (serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase and serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase), alkaline phosphate, bilirubin and lipid peroxidation, while significantly boosted the levels of liver
glutathione, and serum protein.
Neuropharmacological and diuretic activities
Saha etal. [26] Estimated methanolic extracts of C. carandas L. leaves for its neurological and diuretic action and
related significant neurological effect of the plant. While, diuretic effect of the extract was proved by the
electrolyte loss rate (Na/ K excretion ratio was 1.46 and 1.43 at the doses of 200 and 400 mg/ kg respectively) as
that of the standard diuretic furosemide (1.48).
Anti-ulcer activity
Merai and Jadhav [27] estimated differentC. carandas extracts, given orally with the dose of 500 mg/ kg on
several models of gastric ulcer, like as acetic acid produce habitual gastric ulcer, pylorus ligation and ethanol
produce acute gastric ulcer. All extracts boosted the healing of acetic acid- produced chronic gastric ulcers
(p<0.05). The employees concluded that the alcoholic extract of C. carandas displayed largely significant antiulcer activity.
Antimalarial activity
Malaria, an important parasitic illness, affects human health worldwide. Because of the expanded drug resistance
to malarial parasites, there's a need to explore for new antimalarial medications from herbal source. Therefore,
with the aforementioned aim Bapna etal. [30] Analyzed, in-vitro antimalarial effect of three different parts ( leaf,
stem bark and fruit) of the plant C. carandas, evaluated against Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 strain. Of the two
solvent extract analyzed, methanolic extract displayed promising antimalarial effect (IC50 ranged between 13.57
and 69.63 μg/ mL) as compared to aqueous extracts (IC50 ranged between41.52 and> 100 μg/ mL). While, the
host cell cytotoxicity was also tested on Madin-Darby canine kidney cell line using the MTT test that revealed
no cytotoxicity in maximum dose tested.
CONCLUSION
C. carandas, an evergreen, deciduous shrub with immense therapeutic value has been audited with the aim to
give a reference source for biology, phytochemistry, and conservation strategy for additional investigation on the
plant. Ethnopharmacological studies strengthen the concept for utilizing C. carandas plant as a source to
facilitate safe and effective herbal treatments for biological problems. Furthermore, the review aims to give a
direction for additional clinical study