Variations in Polyphenols and Lipid Soluble Vitamins in Moringa oleifera

Abstract

Moringa oleifera is a commonly used plant and a rich source of nutrients and antioxidants. Using HPLC combined with UV and MS detection, a total of 20 moringa leaf samples field-grown from the same genetic varieties introduced into and grown in Ghana, Senegal, and Zambia were collected and analyzed to give an individual account of α- and β-carotenes, α- and γ-tocopherols, and six chlorogenic analogs. The total α- and β-carotenes and α- and γ-tocopherols ranged between 4.49 –116.79 mg/100 g dry weight (d.w.). Total chlorogenic analogs ranged from 181 mg/100 g d.w. Samples varied based on the environment, country of origin and genetic and morphological characteristics. Moringa oleifera has great potential to become a far more important food source as it is a rich source of vitamins and polyphenols.
Moringa oleifera

V. Kuete, in Medicinal Spices and Vegetables from Africa, 2017
Abstract

Moringa oleifera (Moringaceae), commonly known as Moringa, is native to northwestern India, and widely cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas. In Africa, it is widely consumed for self-medication by patients affected by diabetes, hypertension, or HIV/AIDS. Several compounds with pentacosane, hexacosane, (E)-phytol, and 1-[2,3,6-trimethylphenyl]-2-butanone as major constituents were reported in essential oils. Several phenolics as well as isothiocyanates were also reported in the plant. In this chapter, the pharmacological activities, mainly anticancer, antidiabetic, antiinflammatory, and antimicrobial effects, as well as the phytochemistry of M. oleifera have been discussed.
Bioactive compounds from Moringa oleifera as promising protectors of in vivo inflammation and oxidative stress processes

Jaime González-Romero, ... Celia Rodríguez-Pérez, in Current Advances for Development of Functional Foods Modulating Inflammation and Oxidative Stress, 2022
Abstract

Moringa oleifera (MO) Lam is an useful tree that have been traditionally employed for nutritional, medicinal and industrial purposes. Apart from its high-quality nutritional value, it is rich in bioactive compounds such as phenolic compounds, stilbenes, curcuminoids, lignans, glucosinolates, carotenoids, tocopherols and phytosterols, among others coming from different MO parts, for example, leaves, seeds, roots, flowers barks, or pods. Indeed, its composition in bioactive compounds confers its medicinal properties and makes this tree a high valuable crop for commercial and pharmacological uses. This book chapter encompasses a full-composition of all MO parts in bioactive compounds and summarizes the most recent evidence of the antioxidative and antiinflammatory activities of MO in vivo.
Safe African Medicinal Plants for Clinical Studies

Theophine Chinwuba Okoye, ... Emeka K. Okereke, in Toxicological Survey of African Medicinal Plants, 2014
18.2.21 Moringa oleifera Lam. (Moringaceae)

Moringa oleifera is a tree that is sometimes called the “Tree of Life” or “Miracle Tree.” It is an economically important tree and vegetable, which has been variously used in ATM for treatment of different diseases. The leaves of the plant have been reported to possess many pharmacological activities which include analgesic, antiinflammatory, antiasthmatic, antiulcer, antispasmodic, antibacterial, antihyperglycemia, antioxidant, anticancer, and larvicidal activities [64–67]. Toxicological studies on Moringa oleifera have shown absence of severe hepatotoxicity and organ damage except in very high doses. The acute lethality (LD50) test of Moringa oleifera has been found to be relatively safe with the subchronic toxicity studies, eliciting no significant difference in sperm quality, hematological and biochemical parameters in the treated rats compared to the control [68–70]. Moringa oleifera has recently been reported to possess potent anticancer effects and exhibited synergistic effects with cisplatin [71,72]. These and its longtime use in ethnomedicine have shown Moringa oleifera to be a good candidate for clinical trial studies.
Smart irrigation-based behavioral study of Moringa plant for growth monitoring in subtropical desert climatic condition

Vinod Kumar Shukla, ... Farjad Khan, in AI, Edge and IoT-based Smart Agriculture, 2022
3.2 Challenges in subtropical climatic conditions

Moringa oleifera is cultivated by communities surviving in marginal environments with small land areas due to the high population density in these regions [58]. The major challenges faced in these regions are extreme temperatures and reduced rainfall per year, leading to severe drought conditions [59]. In Asia and Africa, studies have shown the use of indigenous and locally available sources of Moringa with moderate levels of protein and fiber [60, 61]. The botanical analysis of Moringa oleifera has shown that the lack of proper irrigation facilities results in a decline in the nutrient value of the plant source, which affects the effective properties of the plant [62].
Medicinal Plants and Their Bioactive Metabolites in Cancer Prevention and Treatment

Armando M. Martín Ortega, Maira Rubi Segura Campos, in Bioactive Compounds, 2019
5.5.9.1 Moringa oleifera

Moringa oleifera (MO) is an indigenous tree from the north of India, Pakistan, and Nepal, of which all its components (leaves, seeds, flowers, and bark) are considered medicinal. Its medicinal components have been used by traditional Ayurvedic medicine, curators of Siddha, Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, among the main traditional medicines. Due to its medicinal properties it has been given names like “miracle tree” and “mother’s best friend” (Leone et al., 2015).

The different parts of the MO plant have been used for different medicinal purposes, although, in general, the leaves are most commonly used. Its leaves have been used in traditional medicine to treat conditions such as malaria, fever, arthritis, high blood pressure, diabetes, parasitic diseases, skin lesions, and even HIV/AIDS. Its roots have been used to prepare infusions for the treatment of parasites, toothache, and to enhance sexual desire. The flowers are considered aphrodisiac and antiinflammatory, useful for the treatment of hysteria, muscle pain, splenomegaly, and even tumors (Leone et al., 2015).

This section will focus on summarizing the medicinal properties of MO leaves for cancer, since they are the most used part for the treatment of different diseases in traditional medicines. However, if the case arises, a comparison of the biological effect between its different parts will be made.

MO leaves have a large number of bioactive compounds, with the main ones including vitamins, polyphenols, phenolic acids, carotenoids, flavonoids, glucosinolates, alkaloids, tannins, saponins, oxalates, and phytates. The concentration of its bioactive compounds varies depending on the growing region of the plant, since the different environmental conditions modify its synthesis (Leone et al., 2015).

Among its main active metabolites are myricetin, quercetin, kaempferol, isorhamnetin, rutin, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, ellagic acid, ferulic acid, gallic acid, N α-l-rhamnopyranosyl vincosamide, 4-(α-l-rhamnopyranosyloxy) phenylacetonitrile (Niazirin), benzyl, and sinalbin (Leone et al., 2015; Rani et al., 2018). However, these are only the main components, as the leaves have a large number of metabolites with potential biological effect. Due to its broad content of metabolites, the extract of the leaves is usually used for different studies and not its metabolites in isolation.

Currently, several in vitro studies have evaluated the potential biological effect of MO extracts, found to possess antiatheroclerotic, immunostimulant, antidiabetic, antihypertensive, antioxidant, antiinflammatory, antimicrobial, and anticancer activities (Rani et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2015; Kou et al., 2018). However, few studies in humans have been performed, and none in cancer patients.

Some of the in vitro effects of MO extracts on cancer cell lines are summarized below.

A study conducted by Jung (2014) evaluated the anticancer potential and its mechanisms of action of an aqueous extract of MO, in several cancer cell lines, including breast, lung, colon, squamous cell carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, etc. However, Jung only presents the results specifically for the lung cancer cell line A549; while, for the other cell lines, it only mentions that it found a cytotoxic and antiproliferative effect. The cellular mechanism of MO to induce cell death of A549 was through the induction of caspase activation. The antiproliferative effect was probably due to a reduction in the expression of AKT, NF-κβ, ERK, and cyclin D1. Likewise, the MO extract also showed some toxicity in the normal control cell line (COS-7). However, it was much lower than in the cancer cell lines. Thus, the author concluded that the MO extract has a specific cytotoxic and antiproliferative effect against cancer cells and could be an important antitumor agent (Jung, 2014).

Also, another study conducted with lung cancer A549, found that the aqueous extract of MO reduced the intracellular levels of glutathione and the expression of Nrf2 (nuclear transcription factor erythroid 2p45 [NF-E2]-related factor 2), reducing the antioxidant capacity of the cancer cell. Nrf2 regulates the expression of antioxidant enzymes, thus its inhibition reduces the expression of these enzymes. Moreover, the extract also significantly induced an increase in the expression of the p53 protein, caspase-9, and caspase-3/7, thus inducing apoptosis of the cell line (Tiloke et al., 2013).

Another study, conducted with the aqueous extract of MO leaves, found that the extract inhibited cell growth and NF-κβ signaling in different pancreatic cancer lines (Panc-1, p34, and COLO 357). In addition, the extract enhanced the cytotoxic effect of the cisplatin chemotherapeutic agent and induced cell arrest in the G1 phase on the Panc-1 line (Berkovich et al., 2013).

With regard to breast and colon cancer, Al-Asmari et al. (2015) evaluated the anticancer activity of extracts of seeds, leaves, and bark of MO, on cell lines of these cancers (MDA-MB-231 and HCT-8, respectively). The study found that the leaves and bark of MO had important anticancer properties, while the seed extract did not. The results illustrated that leaf and bark extracts inhibited cell growth and induced late apoptosis on both cell lines.

In summary, extracts from the MO leaf have been shown to have significant potential as a chemotherapeutic agent in different cancers, including breast, colon, lung, and pancreas. In addition, according to in vitro studies, MO leaf extract could be an important sensitizing agent to the drug cisplatin for the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Further studies are needed on the mechanisms of action involved in its anticancer potential, since in some cell lines it reduced the expression of antioxidant enzymes, which could represent a risk for normal cells. In vivo studies and later clinical models are necessary to be able to define effective doses of MO and prevent side effects due to possible toxicity.
The inhibitory role of the metabolites of Moringa oleifera seeds in cancer cells by apoptosis and cell cycle arrest activation

Ismail Abiola Adebayo, ... Mohammed Razip Samian, in Phytomedicine, 2021
2 Moringa oleifera tree is miraculous

Moringa oleifera tree (Fig. 1), which is popularly named drumstick and horseradish tree (Parrotta, 1993; Roloff, Weisgerber, Lang, & Stimm, 2009), is considered to be a miracle tree by the folklore medicine practitioners in African and Asian continents because of its several economic, health, and nutritional uses (Goyal, Agrawal, Goyal, & Mehta, 2007). Other common names of the tree are benzolive tree, ben oil tree, and moonga. The plant origin is traced to Himalayan foothills of India (Mahmood, Mugal, & Haq, 2010; Ramachandran, Peter, & Gopalakrishnan, 1980). It is a member of Moringaceae family, which has 14 species (Roloff et al., 2009), and it is much more cultivated and studied than other species of the family. It is also grown in several countries such as Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and Pakistan and in West African and North American countries (Mahmood et al., 2010; Roloff et al., 2009).

Moringa oleifera is a 5–10 m tall perennial tree with poor-quality timber, and its evergreen leaves are either tripinnate or bipinnate (Dubey, Dora, Kumar, & Gulsan, 2013; Fahey, 2005; Goyal et al., 2007). The plant has pods that are long and contain seeds of the plant (Roloff et al., 2009). The hull encapsulated the seeds. The seeds are green when they are not matured. After maturation, they become dry, solid, sweet, white seeds (Negi, 1977; Roloff et al., 2009).

The tropics, with 25–30°C temperature range, is the most ideal for the cultivation of Moringa oleifera, especially in its sandy, less acidic, and less basic soils (Gopalakrishnan, Doriya, & Kumar, 2016). The seeds, flower, and leaves of Moringa oleifera are edible, and they are consumed in the form of powder or decoctions and are also eaten in raw forms or cooked to make curries. The ripped, white sweet seeds are peoples’ favorite for consumption (Fahey, 2005). Moringa oleifera leaves, flowers, and seeds have medicinal phytochemicals and they are nutrient rich. The seeds (Fig. 2) have inherent coagulating power, and they are used to coagulate and remove dirt from drinking water in some African countries (Zaku, Emmanuel, Tukur, & Kabir, 2015).
Biological activities of Moringa seeds oil

Yosvany Díaz-Domínguez, ... Danger Tabio-García, in Multiple Biological Activities of Unconventional Seed Oils, 2022
5.6.4.3 Antioxidant activity

M. oleifera antioxidant activity is attributed to the presence of several types of antioxidant constituents. Related to the oil antioxidant potential, monopalmitic acid, oleic acid, tri-oleic triglycerides are the most significant compounds (Dhakad et al., 2019; Mahajan & Mehta, 2007).

Baghel et al. (2012) reported that quercetin isolated from essential oil is quite compelling and can inhibit tumor necrosis factor by Kupffer cells. Moreover, the hydrocarbons of seed essential oil demonstrated radical scavenging effect (Mahajan & Mehta, 2007).

Another study indicated a comparison among the antioxidant activity of M. oleifera seed powder, M. oleifera seed oil from Soxhlet method and its residue. The antioxidant activity was determined using 1,1-diphenyl-2- picrylhydrazy (DPPH) assay. The result confirmed that the M. oleifera seed oil possessed strongest antioxidant capacity, followed by M. oleifera seed and M. oleifera seed residue, respectively. The difference in antioxidant activities among samples can be attributed to tocopherol contents, the presence of phenolic compounds and the form of antioxidant compounds (hydrophilic and lipophilic) (Nawirska-Olszañska et al., 2013; Ruttarattanamonkol & Petrasch, 2015). In addition, Abd El Baky and El-Baroty, focused the investigation to evaluate the antioxidant, antibacterial and antiproliferation activity of M. peregrina seed oil against three cancer cell lines. The antioxidant activity of oil was assess with scavenging of DPPH, ABTS, superoxide (−O2),OH radicals and reducing power techniques (Abd El Baky & El-Baroty, 2013).

Free radicals may cause reversible or irreversible damages to biological molecules such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), proteins and/or lipids. These damages may cause cancer, heart diseases and arthritis, and could accelerate the aging of organisms (Bhatnagar & Gopala, 2013; Siger et al., 2008). Moringa oil showed a comparable high scavenging activity against (−O2) and ·OH radicals to that of standard antioxidants (BHT, BHA, and tocopherol content). However, these effects were dose-dependent, with concentration of 50% inhibition (IC50) values of 56.36 and 45.62 µg/mL, respectively. Moringa peregrina oil also revealed good scavenging abilities against DPPH and ABTS radicals with concentration dependent manner. The IC50 values were 25.65 and 95 µg/mL, respectively (Abd El Baky & El-Baroty, 2013).

A similar study by Ogbunugafor (Ogbunugafor et al., 2011) comparing palm oil with M. oleifera seed oil for their antioxidant potential found out that Moringa oil are superiors for radical scavenging. The investigation reported that Moringa oil have remarkable physico-chemical and antioxidant properties which need to be explored for economic, nutritional and health applications.

Bhatnagar and Gopala (2013) make a comparison between M. oleifera seed oil and commercially refined Groundnut oil for their natural antioxidants. Results demonstrated that M. oleifera oil was richer in bioactives such as tocopherols, phenolics, sterols, and carotenoids than Groundnut oil, showed significantly higher (P .05) percent inhibition of DPPH radicals. Since Moringa oil has a high amount of monounsaturated oleic acid and a very low quantity of polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), it contains an excess of antiradical molecules (tocopherols, phenolics, and carotenoids) for preventing the peroxidation of its PUFA contents and quenching free radicals in the human body. Groundnut oil, being equally rich in PUFA and then may require most of its natural antioxidants for the prevention of peroxidation of its PUFA content. Instead, Moringa oil, being poor in PUFA, for this reason, have higher amounts of natural antioxidants at its disposal for quenching free radicals. This could be the reason for a higherIC50value of Moringa oil than Groundnut oil despite being poorer in tocopherols (Bhatnagar & Gopala, 2013).

Taking into account the above-mentioned discussion, the consumption of Moringa oil could provide health benefits in terms of hypocholesterolemic effects (because of the presence of phytosterols) and scavenging of free radicals in the body (due to the presence of tocopherols, phenolics and carotenoids).
General and Global Situation

Montesano Domenico, ... Blasi Francesca, in Encyclopedia of Food Security and Sustainability, 2019
Synopsis

Moringa oleifera Lamarck is a multi-purpose tropical tree crop with great potentials. All its parts are suitable for a sustainable human and animal nutrition, due to their high nutritional properties. The scientific community has reported that moringa can help improve food security and reduce malnutrition and desertification. This plant is attributed the capacity to cure about three hundred diseases, due to its high content of bioactive compounds. For these remarkable properties, this crop is today considered among the most important and compatible with the great themes related to food security and sustainability both from an environmental and socio-economic point of view.
Moringa (Moringa oleifera) Seed Extract and the Prevention of Oxidative Stress

Swaran J.S. Flora, Vidhu Pachauri, in Nuts and Seeds in Health and Disease Prevention, 2011
Historical Cultivation and Usage

Moringa oleifera Lam. is most widely cultivated species of the monogeneric family in many locations in the tropics. It is an important crop in West, East, and South Africa, tropical Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean, Florida USA, and the Pacific Islands. All parts of the Moringa tree have long been consumed by humans. Young unripe pods are cooked with curries as a preventive against intestinal worms. Unani practitioners prescribe soup made from the pods in sub-acute cases of enlarged liver and spleen, articular pain, debility, neurological disorders, and skin disease. Seeds from the pods, ground with water and instilled into the nostrils, cure headaches due to colds and rhinitis.