Ways To Incorporate Into Your Daily Diet

Moringa is derived from the Moringa oleifera plant, which is also known as the drumstick tree/horseradish tree. It is widely cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions and has its origins in northwest India. The Moringa plant's various parts have been used for various medicinal purposes, with the leaves being the most commonly used. Its leaves have been used to treat ailments like malaria, fever, high blood pressure, diabetes, parasitic diseases and many other. Because of its numerous medicinal properties, it has earned the name "miracle tree." Dr Manoj K. Ahuja, physician at Fortis Hospital in Vasant Kunj, claims "Vitamins, calcium, iron, and crucial amino acids are all found in abundance in the nutrient-dense plant known as moringa. It has a variety of health benefits.'' So, without further ado, let's learn some more benefits of moringa leaves and how to incorporate them into our daily diet.

1. Moringa Tea

In her book "How To Lose Back Fat," Cynthia Trainer claims that "Weight loss has been linked to moringa tea. The leaves are low-fat and nutrient-dense, making them an excellent replacement for high-calorie foods. Energy is produced rather than stored as fat." To make moringa tea, simply boil leaves in water, strain and drink.

2. Murungai Podi

Podi is a dry South Indian masala that is often served with dosa, idli and more. It is typically made with various dals, garlic, and spices; this dry masala adds a unique flavour to your basic meals. Today, we have a similar recipe, but with ten times the benefit. Mururngai Keerai Podi, which translates to drumsticks leaf podi, is a drumstick leaves podi. Click here.

3. Smoothies

Given moringa's nutritional value, whether in powder or whole-leaf form, including it is worthwhile. It pairs particularly well with green smoothies.

4. Add Them To Your Soups

Moringa leaves can be added to any liquid recipe, especially soups like chicken soup, clear soup, and many others.

Disclaimer: This content including advice provides generic information only. It is in no way a substitute for qualified medical opinion. Always consult a specialist or your own doctor for more information. NDTV does not claim responsibility for this information.